::: entry-header
# Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 12 : Gauss's Division of the Circle {#riemann-for-anti-dummies-part-12-gausss-division-of-the-circle .entry-title}
:::

::: entry-content
::: pf-content
Gauss' Division of the Circle

The pursuit of a discovery of a universal principle always requires the
pursuer to follow the Socratic method of negation, or, as Cusa called
it, "Learned Ignorance". This is the method by which Kepler ascended
from the tangle of observed motions of the planets on the inside of an
imaginary sphere, to the "hypergeometric" function, whose
characteristics we've been exploring throughout this series. While the
cause of these observations is determined from the top down by that
function, like the shadows on Plato's Cave, we cannot know that function
directly. Rather, we must look between the gaps in the observations, and
discern the hypergeometry of which those observations are a function.

It is the nature of this method, that, as our knowledge of the
underlying hypergeometry increases, new gaps appear, through which new
characteristics of the hypergeometry become discernable. These new
characteristics, in turn, recast the previous discoveries, in a new
light. For example, the principle that light travels the shortest path,
discovered by the Greeks as a characteristic of reflection, becomes a
special case of the principle that light travels the path of least time,
discovered by Fermat as a characteristic of refraction. In both cases,
light acts according to a minimizing principle. But, in the former, that
principle is with respect to a manifold of space, while the latter is
with respect to a manifold of space-time. It is the manifold from which
the characteristic of the path is determined, but it is the
characteristics of the path, by which the manifold is discovered.

Another example may help illustrate this point. What is the meaning of
the question, "When did human life begin?"? If your conception of the
universe is a reductionist/Darwinian one, in which non-living processes
give rise to living ones, which, in turn, give rise to cognitive
processes, the answer to that question, is, a search for a mystical
point in time, in which something, becomes what it's not. (i.e.,
non-living processes become living, or living processes becomes
cognitive.) However, from the standpoint of a multiply-connected
universe, which, as LaRouche most recently wrote, is organized from the
top down, cognitive, to living, to non- living, the answer to the
question, as Plato, Philo, and Augustine have said, is "from the
beginning." (cognition created man) Under a conception of the universe
organized from the bottom up, the trajectory of evolution is a line.
(Whether that line is curved or straight, it is still a one-dimensional
magnitude.) Whereas, under the top-down conception, the trajectory is of
a quite different nature.

To grasp the nature of that trajectory requires the metaphors developed
by Riemann, toward which this series is heading. To get there, we must
first traverse the intervening steps. This is what brings us to Gauss'
division of the circle. What follows may be at times dense, as it brings
together discoveries that span more than 2500 years of cognition. But
roll up your sleeves and work it through.You will be well rewarded with
learned ignorance.

Kepler, in the first book of the "Harmonies of the World", showed that
the divisions of the circle generate a hierarchy of types of magnitudes.
Following the Greek tradition, these magnitudes are ranked according to
"knowability". Those magnitudes that are measurable directly by the
diameter of the circle, have the first degree of knowability, those
measurable by a part of the diameter, have the second degree, and those
whose squares are measurable by the diameter, have the third. All others
are incommensurable. It is these incommensurable magnitudes, on which
non-uniform motion depends, as Kepler had already shown in his
*Mysterium Cosmographicum* and *The New Astronomy* . Therefore, to grasp
the principles of non-uniform motion, one had to grasp the principles of
generation of these incommensurables.

Magnitudes of the first three degrees of knowability, are also called
constructable, because they can be constructed from the circle itself,
or to put it colloquially, by straight-edge and compass. (The
straight-edge being the diameter and compass being the circumference of
the circle.) It is in the investigation of what is constructable, that
we discover a gap, an anomaly, through which we ascend to the idea,
that, the seemingly uniform circle, is, in fact, not uniform at all, but
a special case of non-uniform action!

Ancient Greek philosophers had fully investigated, that, while the
circle is uniform in all its parts, it does not divide uniformly. The
circle can be divided into two parts by folding in half. By folding in
half again, and again, the circle can be divided into 2,4,8,16,etc.
parts. But to divide it into three parts, that is, to inscribe a
triangle in it, requires the generation of a magnitude of the second
degree of knowability. (Half the diameter, is the side of a hexagon.).
Once that magnitude is created, it too can be doubled, to produce a
division by 6, 12, 24, etc. parts. But, to divide the circle into five
parts, requires the generation of a magnitude of the third degree of
knowability, specifically, the golden section. The golden section is not
commensurable with the diameter or a part of the diameter, but its
square is. Hence, it is constructable.

However, it had been believed for more than 2000 years, that all other
divisions of the circle were non-constructable. In other words, those
divisions of the circle based on prime numbers greater than five,
depended on magnitudes that were beyond Kepler's third degree of
knowability. This boundary condition, suggests that something outside
the circle, a higher principle, is governing. It is that principle, that
Gauss sought.

To discover this principle, Gauss, in effect, inverted the problem all
together. Instead of thinking of two different types of magnitudes,
constructable and non-constructable, he investigated a general principle
governing the generation of magnitudes, of which the constructable ones
were a special case. (A suggestive example of this concept was supplied
by LaRouche several years ago, when he posed that the number 5
associated with the hypotenuse of a 3-4-5 right triangle, should be
considered a special type of irrational number.)

Additionally, Gauss, using a unique application of geometry of position,
which, at first may seem obscure. He inverted the conception of the
circle. Instead of beginning with the circle and trying to find those
positions that divided it, he sought the functions that created a
divided circle. Thus, the positions were produced by the division, not
the division by the positions.

Gauss showed that both the above principles relied on two, seemingly
unrelated, conceptions that were at the heart of Greek science, and,
that had been extended by the work of Kepler, Leibniz, Bernoulli, and
Fermat: the geometric generation of incommensurables, and the more
shrouded principles governing the generation of prime numbers. And,
spurred by Kaestner's prodding, Gauss showed that these principles
extended beyond the circle.

As Gauss described it in the opening of the final chapter of
"Disquistiones Arithmeticae", "Among the most splendid developments
contributed by modern mathematicians, the theory of circular functions
without doubt holds a most important place. We shall have occasion in a
variety of contexts to refer to this remarkable type of quantity, and
there is no part of general mathematics that does not depend on it in
some fashion.... I will speak of the theory of trigonometric functions
as related to arcs that are commensurable with the circumference, or of
the theory of regular polygons....The reader might be surprised to find
a discussion of this subject in the present work which deals with a
discipline apparently so unrelated; but the treatment itself will make
abundantly clear that there is an intimate connection between this
subject and higher Arithmetic.

"The principles of the theory which we are going to explain actually
extend much farther than we will indicate. For they can be applied not
only to circular functions but just as well to other transcendental
functions...."

The first principle of Greek geometry that Gauss re-worked, is described
by Plato in the Meno, Theatetus and Timaeus dialogues, and concerns the
generation of incommensurable magnitudes as a consequence of a change in
dimension. The reader can construct a geometrical representation of this
by drawing a square, then drawing the diagonal, then, drawing a new
square using the diagonal for its side. As Plato demonstrated in the
Meno, the second square will have twice the area of the first, but the
side of the second square, will be incommensurable to the side of the
first. (In Kepler's terms, the diagonal will be the third degree of
"knowability".) If you continue this drawing, you will produce a spiral
sequence of squares, whose sides are the diagonals of the previous
squares, and whose areas are double, the previous squares. The Greeks
called the diagonals, the "geometric mean" between the two squares.

However, something new develops if you try and replicate this process in
3 dimensions, as in the case of doubling a cube. The diagonal of the
cube does not correspond to the side of a cube with double the volume.
This is the famous problem, the Delian priests brought to Plato.
Eratosthenes reports Plato's famous rebuke, that the Gods had posed this
problem to the Greeks, because they wanted to chide the Greeks into
studying geometry in order to improve their thinking. Hippocrates of
Chios had shown that the incommensurable associated with the doubling of
the cube, was of a different species, than the incommensurable
associated with doubling the square. In other words, a change in
dimensionality, produced a different species of incommensurable. In the
Timeaus, Plato reports Hippocrates discovery:

"But it is not possible that two things alone be joined without a third;
for in between there must needs be some bond joining the two.... Now if
the body of the All had had to come into being as a plane surface,
having no depth, one mean would have sufficed to bind together both
itself, and its fellow-terms; but now it is otherwise for it behoved it
to be solid in shape, and what brings solids into harmony is never one
mean, but always two."

By inversion, if two or more geometric means are required to double a
magnitude, the doubling of that magnitude, is an action, that originates
in a dimensionality greater than two.

Gauss' insight rested on these Platonic principles, with a crucial
extension supplied by Bernoulli's discovery of the equiangular spiral,
which he called, "spiral mirabilus". Bernoulli showed that this spiral
was an exemplar of geometric growth. For example, a line extending from
the center of the spiral outward, will be cut at different intervals by
each spiral arm. These intervals will be the same proportion to one
another, as the areas and diagonals of Plato's squares. Similarly, lines
emanating from the center of the spiral at equal angles from each other,
will cut the spiral arms in geometric proportion. Thus, equal divisions
of the spiral, cut the spiral into parts that are in geometric
proportion.

Now, if we think of the circle as a special case of the spiral, then the
division of the circle by lines (radii) emanating from the center at
equal angles, cuts the circumference in arcs that are in geometric
proportion. The intersection of these lines with the circumference
correspond to the vertices of an inscribed polygon. Thus, to divide the
circle into "n" parts, corresponds to finding "n-1" geometric means.
Those divisions, that can be accomplished by finding one mean between
two others, are constructable; and those requiring two or more means are
not. Thus, the different divisions of the circle are actually
projections, of action originating in manifolds, of higher
dimensionality, than the seemingly two dimensions of the circle. Again,
like the shadows on Plato's Cave, or Learned Ignorance, we can only
ascend to knowledge of those manifolds, from the anomalies embedded in
their reflection.

Gauss showed that these anomalies can be discovered, if we think of the
circle, not in a Euclidean/Cartesian plane, but in the complex domain. A
simple example is, perhaps, the easiest way to illustrate the point. To
divide a circle into 4 parts, first think of the circle in the complex
domain. Pick a point on the circumference for the first vertex, and call
it 1. To divide the circle into four parts we would mark off three other
points that are 90 degrees from each other. According to what we said
above from Bernoulli and Plato, these points are all in geometric
proportion to each other. Expressed in numbers, these points form a
cycle of geometric means from 1 to 1. Using the letter *i* to denote the
square root of -1, that series is, 1, *i* , -1, -- *i* . These four
numbers produce a cycle, such that if you multiply each one by itself 4
times, you get 1.

Gauss' insight was based on the following: Dividing the circle into "n"
parts requires finding "n-1" geometric means between 1 and 1. Each "n"
divisions requires a function with specific characteristics. Gauss
discovered a general principle that governed the nature of those
characteristics.

Again, it is easiest to demonstrate this by example. Put five dots on a
page, roughly in a circle and number the dots counter-clockwise, 1, 2,
3, 4, 5. Now, connect dot 1-3, then 3-5, then 5- 2, then 2-4, then 4-1.
In this action, you went around the circle twice, connecting 2 dots in
each turn. You also drew a pentagonal star. Perform the same action,
connecting 1-4; 4-2; 2-5; 5-3; 3- 1. This produces the same result as
above. Try the same with 7 dots. Connect 1-3; 3-5; 5-7; 7-2; 2- 4; 4-6;
6-1. This action required 2 cycles, connecting 3 dots in each cycle (3,
5, 7) and (2, 4, 6). Notice the shape of the heptagonal star. Make
another configuration of 7 dots, and connect them in the following
sequence: 1-4; 4-7; 7-3; 3-6; 6-2; 2-5; 5-1. This action required 3
cycles, connecting 2 dots in each cycle. Notice that the shape of this
heptagonal star is different than the previous one. If you experiment
around, using different cycles, (e.g. 1-5; 5-2;, etc. ) the result will
be identical to one of the two produced above. Now, continue these types
of experiments with 7, 11, 13 and 17 dots. In each case, you will find
that the combinations of cycles and dots, is constrained by the prime
number factors of 10, 12, and 16 respectively, ( n-1).

Gauss showed that these combinations of cycles corresponds to Plato's
principle of means. Those divisions that can be resolved completely into
cycles of 2, correspond to inserting 1 geometric mean between two
others, as in doubling of the square, and are therefore constructable.
Those prime number divisions that cannot be so resolved, correspond to
inserting two or more geometric means, and, like the doubling of the
cube, are not constructable. Thus, it is possible to construct figures
of 2, 3, 5, 17, 257, 65,537 and any other prime number divisions of the
form (2 ^2^ ) ^n\ +\ 1^ . All other divisions cannot be constructed
because they are reflections of actions of a dimensionality higher than
two.

It is the thinking underlying the above discovery of Gauss, that is at
the heart of Gauss' and Riemann's development of the theory of
functions.
:::

::: {.addtoany_share_save_container .addtoany_content_bottom}
::: {.a2a_kit .a2a_kit_size_32 .addtoany_list a2a-url="http://lymcanada.org/12/" a2a-title="Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 12 :  Gauss’s Division of the Circle"}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F12%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2012%20%3A%20%20Gauss%E2%80%99s%20Division%20of%20the%20Circle "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F12%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2012%20%3A%20%20Gauss%E2%80%99s%20Division%20of%20the%20Circle "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/google_plus?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F12%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2012%20%3A%20%20Gauss%E2%80%99s%20Division%20of%20the%20Circle "Google+"){.a2a_button_google_plus}
[](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd .addtoany_share_save}
:::
:::
:::

[ [ Posted on ]{.screen-reader-text} [February 20, 2010 December 30,
2014](http://lymcanada.org/12/) ]{.posted-on} [ [ [ Author
]{.screen-reader-text} [Bruce
Director](http://lymcanada.org/author/bdirector/){.url .fn .n} ]{.author
.vcard} ]{.byline} [ [ Categories ]{.screen-reader-text}
[EN](http://lymcanada.org/category/en/) , [Riemann for
Anti-Dummies](http://lymcanada.org/category/science-1/c132-riemann-for-anti-dummies/)
]{.cat-links}

::: entry-header
# Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 12 : Gauss's Division of the Circle {#riemann-for-anti-dummies-part-12-gausss-division-of-the-circle-1 .entry-title}
:::

::: entry-content
::: pf-content
Gauss' Division of the Circle

The pursuit of a discovery of a universal principle always requires the
pursuer to follow the Socratic method of negation, or, as Cusa called
it, "Learned Ignorance". This is the method by which Kepler ascended
from the tangle of observed motions of the planets on the inside of an
imaginary sphere, to the "hypergeometric" function, whose
characteristics we've been exploring throughout this series. While the
cause of these observations is determined from the top down by that
function, like the shadows on Plato's Cave, we cannot know that function
directly. Rather, we must look between the gaps in the observations, and
discern the hypergeometry of which those observations are a function.

It is the nature of this method, that, as our knowledge of the
underlying hypergeometry increases, new gaps appear, through which new
characteristics of the hypergeometry become discernable. These new
characteristics, in turn, recast the previous discoveries, in a new
light. For example, the principle that light travels the shortest path,
discovered by the Greeks as a characteristic of reflection, becomes a
special case of the principle that light travels the path of least time,
discovered by Fermat as a characteristic of refraction. In both cases,
light acts according to a minimizing principle. But, in the former, that
principle is with respect to a manifold of space, while the latter is
with respect to a manifold of space-time. It is the manifold from which
the characteristic of the path is determined, but it is the
characteristics of the path, by which the manifold is discovered.

Another example may help illustrate this point. What is the meaning of
the question, "When did human life begin?"? If your conception of the
universe is a reductionist/Darwinian one, in which non-living processes
give rise to living ones, which, in turn, give rise to cognitive
processes, the answer to that question, is, a search for a mystical
point in time, in which something, becomes what it's not. (i.e.,
non-living processes become living, or living processes becomes
cognitive.) However, from the standpoint of a multiply-connected
universe, which, as LaRouche most recently wrote, is organized from the
top down, cognitive, to living, to non- living, the answer to the
question, as Plato, Philo, and Augustine have said, is "from the
beginning." (cognition created man) Under a conception of the universe
organized from the bottom up, the trajectory of evolution is a line.
(Whether that line is curved or straight, it is still a one-dimensional
magnitude.) Whereas, under the top-down conception, the trajectory is of
a quite different nature.

To grasp the nature of that trajectory requires the metaphors developed
by Riemann, toward which this series is heading. To get there, we must
first traverse the intervening steps. This is what brings us to Gauss'
division of the circle. What follows may be at times dense, as it brings
together discoveries that span more than 2500 years of cognition. But
roll up your sleeves and work it through.You will be well rewarded with
learned ignorance.

Kepler, in the first book of the "Harmonies of the World", showed that
the divisions of the circle generate a hierarchy of types of magnitudes.
Following the Greek tradition, these magnitudes are ranked according to
"knowability". Those magnitudes that are measurable directly by the
diameter of the circle, have the first degree of knowability, those
measurable by a part of the diameter, have the second degree, and those
whose squares are measurable by the diameter, have the third. All others
are incommensurable. It is these incommensurable magnitudes, on which
non-uniform motion depends, as Kepler had already shown in his
*Mysterium Cosmographicum* and *The New Astronomy* . Therefore, to grasp
the principles of non-uniform motion, one had to grasp the principles of
generation of these incommensurables.

Magnitudes of the first three degrees of knowability, are also called
constructable, because they can be constructed from the circle itself,
or to put it colloquially, by straight-edge and compass. (The
straight-edge being the diameter and compass being the circumference of
the circle.) It is in the investigation of what is constructable, that
we discover a gap, an anomaly, through which we ascend to the idea,
that, the seemingly uniform circle, is, in fact, not uniform at all, but
a special case of non-uniform action!

Ancient Greek philosophers had fully investigated, that, while the
circle is uniform in all its parts, it does not divide uniformly. The
circle can be divided into two parts by folding in half. By folding in
half again, and again, the circle can be divided into 2,4,8,16,etc.
parts. But to divide it into three parts, that is, to inscribe a
triangle in it, requires the generation of a magnitude of the second
degree of knowability. (Half the diameter, is the side of a hexagon.).
Once that magnitude is created, it too can be doubled, to produce a
division by 6, 12, 24, etc. parts. But, to divide the circle into five
parts, requires the generation of a magnitude of the third degree of
knowability, specifically, the golden section. The golden section is not
commensurable with the diameter or a part of the diameter, but its
square is. Hence, it is constructable.

However, it had been believed for more than 2000 years, that all other
divisions of the circle were non-constructable. In other words, those
divisions of the circle based on prime numbers greater than five,
depended on magnitudes that were beyond Kepler's third degree of
knowability. This boundary condition, suggests that something outside
the circle, a higher principle, is governing. It is that principle, that
Gauss sought.

To discover this principle, Gauss, in effect, inverted the problem all
together. Instead of thinking of two different types of magnitudes,
constructable and non-constructable, he investigated a general principle
governing the generation of magnitudes, of which the constructable ones
were a special case. (A suggestive example of this concept was supplied
by LaRouche several years ago, when he posed that the number 5
associated with the hypotenuse of a 3-4-5 right triangle, should be
considered a special type of irrational number.)

Additionally, Gauss, using a unique application of geometry of position,
which, at first may seem obscure. He inverted the conception of the
circle. Instead of beginning with the circle and trying to find those
positions that divided it, he sought the functions that created a
divided circle. Thus, the positions were produced by the division, not
the division by the positions.

Gauss showed that both the above principles relied on two, seemingly
unrelated, conceptions that were at the heart of Greek science, and,
that had been extended by the work of Kepler, Leibniz, Bernoulli, and
Fermat: the geometric generation of incommensurables, and the more
shrouded principles governing the generation of prime numbers. And,
spurred by Kaestner's prodding, Gauss showed that these principles
extended beyond the circle.

As Gauss described it in the opening of the final chapter of
"Disquistiones Arithmeticae", "Among the most splendid developments
contributed by modern mathematicians, the theory of circular functions
without doubt holds a most important place. We shall have occasion in a
variety of contexts to refer to this remarkable type of quantity, and
there is no part of general mathematics that does not depend on it in
some fashion.... I will speak of the theory of trigonometric functions
as related to arcs that are commensurable with the circumference, or of
the theory of regular polygons....The reader might be surprised to find
a discussion of this subject in the present work which deals with a
discipline apparently so unrelated; but the treatment itself will make
abundantly clear that there is an intimate connection between this
subject and higher Arithmetic.

"The principles of the theory which we are going to explain actually
extend much farther than we will indicate. For they can be applied not
only to circular functions but just as well to other transcendental
functions...."

The first principle of Greek geometry that Gauss re-worked, is described
by Plato in the Meno, Theatetus and Timaeus dialogues, and concerns the
generation of incommensurable magnitudes as a consequence of a change in
dimension. The reader can construct a geometrical representation of this
by drawing a square, then drawing the diagonal, then, drawing a new
square using the diagonal for its side. As Plato demonstrated in the
Meno, the second square will have twice the area of the first, but the
side of the second square, will be incommensurable to the side of the
first. (In Kepler's terms, the diagonal will be the third degree of
"knowability".) If you continue this drawing, you will produce a spiral
sequence of squares, whose sides are the diagonals of the previous
squares, and whose areas are double, the previous squares. The Greeks
called the diagonals, the "geometric mean" between the two squares.

However, something new develops if you try and replicate this process in
3 dimensions, as in the case of doubling a cube. The diagonal of the
cube does not correspond to the side of a cube with double the volume.
This is the famous problem, the Delian priests brought to Plato.
Eratosthenes reports Plato's famous rebuke, that the Gods had posed this
problem to the Greeks, because they wanted to chide the Greeks into
studying geometry in order to improve their thinking. Hippocrates of
Chios had shown that the incommensurable associated with the doubling of
the cube, was of a different species, than the incommensurable
associated with doubling the square. In other words, a change in
dimensionality, produced a different species of incommensurable. In the
Timeaus, Plato reports Hippocrates discovery:

"But it is not possible that two things alone be joined without a third;
for in between there must needs be some bond joining the two.... Now if
the body of the All had had to come into being as a plane surface,
having no depth, one mean would have sufficed to bind together both
itself, and its fellow-terms; but now it is otherwise for it behoved it
to be solid in shape, and what brings solids into harmony is never one
mean, but always two."

By inversion, if two or more geometric means are required to double a
magnitude, the doubling of that magnitude, is an action, that originates
in a dimensionality greater than two.

Gauss' insight rested on these Platonic principles, with a crucial
extension supplied by Bernoulli's discovery of the equiangular spiral,
which he called, "spiral mirabilus". Bernoulli showed that this spiral
was an exemplar of geometric growth. For example, a line extending from
the center of the spiral outward, will be cut at different intervals by
each spiral arm. These intervals will be the same proportion to one
another, as the areas and diagonals of Plato's squares. Similarly, lines
emanating from the center of the spiral at equal angles from each other,
will cut the spiral arms in geometric proportion. Thus, equal divisions
of the spiral, cut the spiral into parts that are in geometric
proportion.

Now, if we think of the circle as a special case of the spiral, then the
division of the circle by lines (radii) emanating from the center at
equal angles, cuts the circumference in arcs that are in geometric
proportion. The intersection of these lines with the circumference
correspond to the vertices of an inscribed polygon. Thus, to divide the
circle into "n" parts, corresponds to finding "n-1" geometric means.
Those divisions, that can be accomplished by finding one mean between
two others, are constructable; and those requiring two or more means are
not. Thus, the different divisions of the circle are actually
projections, of action originating in manifolds, of higher
dimensionality, than the seemingly two dimensions of the circle. Again,
like the shadows on Plato's Cave, or Learned Ignorance, we can only
ascend to knowledge of those manifolds, from the anomalies embedded in
their reflection.

Gauss showed that these anomalies can be discovered, if we think of the
circle, not in a Euclidean/Cartesian plane, but in the complex domain. A
simple example is, perhaps, the easiest way to illustrate the point. To
divide a circle into 4 parts, first think of the circle in the complex
domain. Pick a point on the circumference for the first vertex, and call
it 1. To divide the circle into four parts we would mark off three other
points that are 90 degrees from each other. According to what we said
above from Bernoulli and Plato, these points are all in geometric
proportion to each other. Expressed in numbers, these points form a
cycle of geometric means from 1 to 1. Using the letter *i* to denote the
square root of -1, that series is, 1, *i* , -1, -- *i* . These four
numbers produce a cycle, such that if you multiply each one by itself 4
times, you get 1.

Gauss' insight was based on the following: Dividing the circle into "n"
parts requires finding "n-1" geometric means between 1 and 1. Each "n"
divisions requires a function with specific characteristics. Gauss
discovered a general principle that governed the nature of those
characteristics.

Again, it is easiest to demonstrate this by example. Put five dots on a
page, roughly in a circle and number the dots counter-clockwise, 1, 2,
3, 4, 5. Now, connect dot 1-3, then 3-5, then 5- 2, then 2-4, then 4-1.
In this action, you went around the circle twice, connecting 2 dots in
each turn. You also drew a pentagonal star. Perform the same action,
connecting 1-4; 4-2; 2-5; 5-3; 3- 1. This produces the same result as
above. Try the same with 7 dots. Connect 1-3; 3-5; 5-7; 7-2; 2- 4; 4-6;
6-1. This action required 2 cycles, connecting 3 dots in each cycle (3,
5, 7) and (2, 4, 6). Notice the shape of the heptagonal star. Make
another configuration of 7 dots, and connect them in the following
sequence: 1-4; 4-7; 7-3; 3-6; 6-2; 2-5; 5-1. This action required 3
cycles, connecting 2 dots in each cycle. Notice that the shape of this
heptagonal star is different than the previous one. If you experiment
around, using different cycles, (e.g. 1-5; 5-2;, etc. ) the result will
be identical to one of the two produced above. Now, continue these types
of experiments with 7, 11, 13 and 17 dots. In each case, you will find
that the combinations of cycles and dots, is constrained by the prime
number factors of 10, 12, and 16 respectively, ( n-1).

Gauss showed that these combinations of cycles corresponds to Plato's
principle of means. Those divisions that can be resolved completely into
cycles of 2, correspond to inserting 1 geometric mean between two
others, as in doubling of the square, and are therefore constructable.
Those prime number divisions that cannot be so resolved, correspond to
inserting two or more geometric means, and, like the doubling of the
cube, are not constructable. Thus, it is possible to construct figures
of 2, 3, 5, 17, 257, 65,537 and any other prime number divisions of the
form (2 ^2^ ) ^n\ +\ 1^ . All other divisions cannot be constructed
because they are reflections of actions of a dimensionality higher than
two.

It is the thinking underlying the above discovery of Gauss, that is at
the heart of Gauss' and Riemann's development of the theory of
functions.
:::

::: {.addtoany_share_save_container .addtoany_content_bottom}
::: {.a2a_kit .a2a_kit_size_32 .addtoany_list a2a-url="http://lymcanada.org/12/" a2a-title="Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 12 :  Gauss’s Division of the Circle"}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F12%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2012%20%3A%20%20Gauss%E2%80%99s%20Division%20of%20the%20Circle "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F12%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2012%20%3A%20%20Gauss%E2%80%99s%20Division%20of%20the%20Circle "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/google_plus?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F12%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2012%20%3A%20%20Gauss%E2%80%99s%20Division%20of%20the%20Circle "Google+"){.a2a_button_google_plus}
[](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd .addtoany_share_save}
:::
:::
:::

[ [ Posted on ]{.screen-reader-text} [February 20, 2010 December 30,
2014](http://lymcanada.org/12/) ]{.posted-on} [ [ [ Author
]{.screen-reader-text} [Bruce
Director](http://lymcanada.org/author/bdirector/){.url .fn .n} ]{.author
.vcard} ]{.byline} [ [ Categories ]{.screen-reader-text}
[EN](http://lymcanada.org/category/en/) , [Riemann for
Anti-Dummies](http://lymcanada.org/category/science-1/c132-riemann-for-anti-dummies/)
]{.cat-links}
