::: entry-header
# Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 13 : The Finer Art of Science {#riemann-for-anti-dummies-part-13-the-finer-art-of-science .entry-title}
:::

::: entry-content
::: pf-content
The Finer Art of Science

How often have you heard, after briefing someone on the strategic
situation and LaRouche's unique role in leading mankind out of this
crisis, the retort, "I just don't think one man can have the answer."
Such a response, not only indicates a narrow, petty, and small minded
way of thinking, but, it actually displays a gross illiteracy concerning
the history of ideas. In fact, all scientific (and artistic) discoveries
were made by one person, who, when that discovery was made, was the only
person in the universe who, "had the answer". In truth, the human race
has existed to date, because, one person, "had the answer", when no one
else did.

Such genius is characterized by the ability, and the willingness, to
find principles, in small deviations from the expected, where everyone
else finds either no deviations, or excuses such deviations as mere
errors. For example, Kepler's discovery that the planetary orbits were
elliptical, was provoked by a deviation of 8 minutes of an arc, between
the observations, and the results he expected from his hypothesis that
the planets moved on eccentric circles. Or, Gauss' determination that
the shape of the Earth was both non-uniform and irregular, was provoked
by the 16 seconds of an arc deviation, between the measurements of the
height of the pole star and the measurements of his geodetic
triangulation from Goettingen to Altona. Or, LaRouche's determination of
the trajectory of the economy, from the small changes in the mental
activity of the population.

In each example, as in all scientific discoveries, it was these small
deviations from the "normal" from which new revolutionary concepts were
derived.

This process was described by B. Riemann in some philosophical
fragments, published for the first time in English in the Winter
1995-1996 issue of Twenty First Century Science and Technology:

"Natural science is the attempt to understand nature by means of exact
concepts.

"According to the concepts through which we comprehend nature our
perceptions are supplemented and filled in, not simply at each moment,
but also future perceptions are seen as necessary. Or, to the degree
that the conceptual system is not fully sufficient, future perceptions
are determined beforehand as probable; according to the concepts, what
is "possible" is determined ( thus what is "necessary" and conversely,
impossible). And the degree of possibility (of "probability") of each
individual even which is seen as possible, in light of these concepts,
can be mathematically determined, if the concepts are precise enough.

"To the extent that what is necessary or probable, according to these
concepts, takes place, then this confirms the concepts, and the trust
that we place in these concepts rests on this confirmation through
experience. But, if something takes place that is unexpected according
our existing assumptions, i.e. that is impossible or improbable
according to them, then the task arises of completing them or, if
necessary reworking the axioms, so that what is perceived ceases to be
impossible or, improbable. The completion or improvement of the
conceptual system forms the "explanation" of the unexpected perception.
Our comprehension of nature gradually becomes more and more complete and
correct through this process, simultaneously penetrating more and more
behind the surface of appearances.

"The history of causal natural science, in so far as we can trace it
back, show that this is, in fact, the way our knowledge of nature
advances. The conceptual systems that are now the basis for the natural
sciences, arose through a gradual transformation of older conceptual
systems, and the reasons that drove us to new modes of explanation can
always be traced back to contradictions and improbabilities that emerged
from the older modes of explanation.

"The formation of new concepts, in so far as this process is accessible
to observation, therefore takes place in this way."

In that same fragment, Riemann goes on to say:

"1. When is our comprehension of the world true?

"\`When the relations among our conceptions correspond to the relations
of things.'

"The elements of our picture of the world are completely distinct from
the corresponding elements of the reality which they picture. They are
something within us; the elements of reality are something outside of
ourselves. But, the connections among the elements in the picture, and
among the elements of reality which they depict, must agree, if the
picture is to be true.'

"The truth of the picture is independent of its degree of fineness; it
does not depend upon whether the elements of the picture represent
larger or smaller aggregates of reality. But, the connections must
correspond to one another; a direct action of two elements upon each
other may not be assumed in the picture, where only an indirect one
occurs in reality. Otherwise the picture would be false and would need
correction. If, however, an element of the picture is replaced by a
group of finer elements, so that its properties emerge, partly from the
simpler properties of the finer elements, but partly from their
connections, and thus become in part comprehensible, then this increases
our insight into the connection of things, but without the earlier
understanding having to be declared false."

Consequently, the healthy mind seeks the ever finer elements that reveal
those, yet undiscovered, cycles governing action in the universe. Such
cycles had been there all along, but, once discovered, the universe, in
which they were acting, changes, by virtue of their now becoming an
object of human cognition. This, in turn, enables man to begin a new
quest for even finer elements, a search whose possibility depends on the
just discovered new cycles. It is the intention, at this point in this
series, "Riemann for Anti-Dummies", to investigate those finer
discoveries, on which the new concepts of Gauss and Riemann are based.
Significantly, the deeper implications of those concepts were not fully
recognized, even by Gauss and Riemann, until LaRouche's discoveries in
physical economy.

The finer elements that gave rise to these new concepts of Gauss and
Riemann were centered in the investigations of the inter-related areas
of astrophysics, geodesy, electromagnetism and life. The most efficient
path to grasp the Gauss/Riemann theory of functions is through a
pedagogical presentation of them, which defines the intended trajectory
of this series.

1\. Astrophysical-- Kepler had left open for discovery, a planetary
orbit between Mars and Jupiter based on a dissonance between the angular
speeds between those two planets, which dissonance, Kepler notes, was
evidenced by the smallest deviation perceptible. Gauss' determination of
the orbit of Ceres, and the subsequent discoveries of other asteroids,
confirmed Kepler's hypothesis. The orbits of these finer elements were
consistent with the principles Kepler had discovered for the six visible
planets. The eccentricities, inclinations, and interweavings, of these
orbits made hitherto unobserved, but suspected, orbital irregularities,
measurable. Gauss' investigation showed that these irregularities, were,
in fact, not irregularities, but evidence of finer cycles that permeated
the whole solar system. This extended colligation of cycles gave rise to
a new concept of manifold in the minds of Gauss and Riemann.

2\. Geodesic-- Earlier measurements of the Earth had shown that its
shape was non- uniform (ellipsoidal) rather than uniform (spherical).
Gauss spent nearly 20 years making and supervising careful physical
measurements of the Earth's gravitational and magnetic characteristic,
and relating those measurements to astronomical ones. Gauss' meticulous
effort revealed that these characteristics deviated slightly from the
concept of simple non-uniformity, as, for example, in an ellipsoid, and
he showed the error of assuming any shape a priori. Instead, Gauss
developed the idea of the shape of the Earth as a non-uniform and
irregular manifold of measurement, today called the "Geoid". To measure
this concept, Gauss, and later Riemann, extended Leibniz' calculus from
concerning the characteristic of action along pathways, to the
characteristic of action in the surfaces on which those pathways exist.

3\. Electromagnetism and Light-- The work of Ampere and Fresnel posed
the paradox that the assumed characteristics of action in space in the
macroscopic realm became discontinuous in the microphysical realm. Such
paradoxes led to Gauss' and Riemann's development of retarded potential,
and Riemann's concepts of complex functions.

4\. Life-- The functional relationship between living and non-living
processes were investigated by Riemann, notably in his researches into
the characteristics of a sound wave, in the human ear, and in the air.

But, it would be wrong to leave the suggestion that a thinking mind
would be content with existing concepts, until knocked on the head by
some physical deviation, instead of actively seeking out such paradoxes.
Think of this process as a type of a well-composed fugue, in which the
theme and counter-theme become indistinguishable as to cause, and only
the whole composition remains in the mind as a One. For example, the
discoveries of Kepler, Fermat and Leibniz had already provoked Abraham
Kaestner to knock down the remaining pillars of ivory tower mathematics
with his attacks on the a priori acceptance of Euclidean geometry. Once
that was initiated, Kaestner shifted life's trajectory of the young
Gauss, by (as discussed in the last two installments) provoking that
young man to draw out the deeper implications of his first discovery,
the constructability of the 17-gon. That small shift, which Kaestner
induced into Gauss' mind, contained the insights that emerged, years
later, in the investigations of the physical paradoxes just described.

That's where this series is headed.
:::

::: {.addtoany_share_save_container .addtoany_content_bottom}
::: {.a2a_kit .a2a_kit_size_32 .addtoany_list a2a-url="http://lymcanada.org/13/" a2a-title="Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 13 :  The Finer Art of Science"}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F13%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2013%20%3A%20%20The%20Finer%20Art%20of%20Science "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F13%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2013%20%3A%20%20The%20Finer%20Art%20of%20Science "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/google_plus?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F13%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2013%20%3A%20%20The%20Finer%20Art%20of%20Science "Google+"){.a2a_button_google_plus}
[](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd .addtoany_share_save}
:::
:::
:::

[ [ Posted on ]{.screen-reader-text} [February 20, 2010 February 24,
2019](http://lymcanada.org/13/) ]{.posted-on} [ [ [ Author
]{.screen-reader-text} [Bruce
Director](http://lymcanada.org/author/bdirector/){.url .fn .n} ]{.author
.vcard} ]{.byline} [ [ Categories ]{.screen-reader-text}
[EN](http://lymcanada.org/category/en/) , [Riemmann for
Anti-Dummies](http://lymcanada.org/category/science-1/c132-riemmann-for-anti-dummies/)
]{.cat-links}

::: entry-header
# Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 13 : The Finer Art of Science {#riemann-for-anti-dummies-part-13-the-finer-art-of-science-1 .entry-title}
:::

::: entry-content
::: pf-content
The Finer Art of Science

How often have you heard, after briefing someone on the strategic
situation and LaRouche's unique role in leading mankind out of this
crisis, the retort, "I just don't think one man can have the answer."
Such a response, not only indicates a narrow, petty, and small minded
way of thinking, but, it actually displays a gross illiteracy concerning
the history of ideas. In fact, all scientific (and artistic) discoveries
were made by one person, who, when that discovery was made, was the only
person in the universe who, "had the answer". In truth, the human race
has existed to date, because, one person, "had the answer", when no one
else did.

Such genius is characterized by the ability, and the willingness, to
find principles, in small deviations from the expected, where everyone
else finds either no deviations, or excuses such deviations as mere
errors. For example, Kepler's discovery that the planetary orbits were
elliptical, was provoked by a deviation of 8 minutes of an arc, between
the observations, and the results he expected from his hypothesis that
the planets moved on eccentric circles. Or, Gauss' determination that
the shape of the Earth was both non-uniform and irregular, was provoked
by the 16 seconds of an arc deviation, between the measurements of the
height of the pole star and the measurements of his geodetic
triangulation from Goettingen to Altona. Or, LaRouche's determination of
the trajectory of the economy, from the small changes in the mental
activity of the population.

In each example, as in all scientific discoveries, it was these small
deviations from the "normal" from which new revolutionary concepts were
derived.

This process was described by B. Riemann in some philosophical
fragments, published for the first time in English in the Winter
1995-1996 issue of Twenty First Century Science and Technology:

"Natural science is the attempt to understand nature by means of exact
concepts.

"According to the concepts through which we comprehend nature our
perceptions are supplemented and filled in, not simply at each moment,
but also future perceptions are seen as necessary. Or, to the degree
that the conceptual system is not fully sufficient, future perceptions
are determined beforehand as probable; according to the concepts, what
is "possible" is determined ( thus what is "necessary" and conversely,
impossible). And the degree of possibility (of "probability") of each
individual even which is seen as possible, in light of these concepts,
can be mathematically determined, if the concepts are precise enough.

"To the extent that what is necessary or probable, according to these
concepts, takes place, then this confirms the concepts, and the trust
that we place in these concepts rests on this confirmation through
experience. But, if something takes place that is unexpected according
our existing assumptions, i.e. that is impossible or improbable
according to them, then the task arises of completing them or, if
necessary reworking the axioms, so that what is perceived ceases to be
impossible or, improbable. The completion or improvement of the
conceptual system forms the "explanation" of the unexpected perception.
Our comprehension of nature gradually becomes more and more complete and
correct through this process, simultaneously penetrating more and more
behind the surface of appearances.

"The history of causal natural science, in so far as we can trace it
back, show that this is, in fact, the way our knowledge of nature
advances. The conceptual systems that are now the basis for the natural
sciences, arose through a gradual transformation of older conceptual
systems, and the reasons that drove us to new modes of explanation can
always be traced back to contradictions and improbabilities that emerged
from the older modes of explanation.

"The formation of new concepts, in so far as this process is accessible
to observation, therefore takes place in this way."

In that same fragment, Riemann goes on to say:

"1. When is our comprehension of the world true?

"\`When the relations among our conceptions correspond to the relations
of things.'

"The elements of our picture of the world are completely distinct from
the corresponding elements of the reality which they picture. They are
something within us; the elements of reality are something outside of
ourselves. But, the connections among the elements in the picture, and
among the elements of reality which they depict, must agree, if the
picture is to be true.'

"The truth of the picture is independent of its degree of fineness; it
does not depend upon whether the elements of the picture represent
larger or smaller aggregates of reality. But, the connections must
correspond to one another; a direct action of two elements upon each
other may not be assumed in the picture, where only an indirect one
occurs in reality. Otherwise the picture would be false and would need
correction. If, however, an element of the picture is replaced by a
group of finer elements, so that its properties emerge, partly from the
simpler properties of the finer elements, but partly from their
connections, and thus become in part comprehensible, then this increases
our insight into the connection of things, but without the earlier
understanding having to be declared false."

Consequently, the healthy mind seeks the ever finer elements that reveal
those, yet undiscovered, cycles governing action in the universe. Such
cycles had been there all along, but, once discovered, the universe, in
which they were acting, changes, by virtue of their now becoming an
object of human cognition. This, in turn, enables man to begin a new
quest for even finer elements, a search whose possibility depends on the
just discovered new cycles. It is the intention, at this point in this
series, "Riemann for Anti-Dummies", to investigate those finer
discoveries, on which the new concepts of Gauss and Riemann are based.
Significantly, the deeper implications of those concepts were not fully
recognized, even by Gauss and Riemann, until LaRouche's discoveries in
physical economy.

The finer elements that gave rise to these new concepts of Gauss and
Riemann were centered in the investigations of the inter-related areas
of astrophysics, geodesy, electromagnetism and life. The most efficient
path to grasp the Gauss/Riemann theory of functions is through a
pedagogical presentation of them, which defines the intended trajectory
of this series.

1\. Astrophysical-- Kepler had left open for discovery, a planetary
orbit between Mars and Jupiter based on a dissonance between the angular
speeds between those two planets, which dissonance, Kepler notes, was
evidenced by the smallest deviation perceptible. Gauss' determination of
the orbit of Ceres, and the subsequent discoveries of other asteroids,
confirmed Kepler's hypothesis. The orbits of these finer elements were
consistent with the principles Kepler had discovered for the six visible
planets. The eccentricities, inclinations, and interweavings, of these
orbits made hitherto unobserved, but suspected, orbital irregularities,
measurable. Gauss' investigation showed that these irregularities, were,
in fact, not irregularities, but evidence of finer cycles that permeated
the whole solar system. This extended colligation of cycles gave rise to
a new concept of manifold in the minds of Gauss and Riemann.

2\. Geodesic-- Earlier measurements of the Earth had shown that its
shape was non- uniform (ellipsoidal) rather than uniform (spherical).
Gauss spent nearly 20 years making and supervising careful physical
measurements of the Earth's gravitational and magnetic characteristic,
and relating those measurements to astronomical ones. Gauss' meticulous
effort revealed that these characteristics deviated slightly from the
concept of simple non-uniformity, as, for example, in an ellipsoid, and
he showed the error of assuming any shape a priori. Instead, Gauss
developed the idea of the shape of the Earth as a non-uniform and
irregular manifold of measurement, today called the "Geoid". To measure
this concept, Gauss, and later Riemann, extended Leibniz' calculus from
concerning the characteristic of action along pathways, to the
characteristic of action in the surfaces on which those pathways exist.

3\. Electromagnetism and Light-- The work of Ampere and Fresnel posed
the paradox that the assumed characteristics of action in space in the
macroscopic realm became discontinuous in the microphysical realm. Such
paradoxes led to Gauss' and Riemann's development of retarded potential,
and Riemann's concepts of complex functions.

4\. Life-- The functional relationship between living and non-living
processes were investigated by Riemann, notably in his researches into
the characteristics of a sound wave, in the human ear, and in the air.

But, it would be wrong to leave the suggestion that a thinking mind
would be content with existing concepts, until knocked on the head by
some physical deviation, instead of actively seeking out such paradoxes.
Think of this process as a type of a well-composed fugue, in which the
theme and counter-theme become indistinguishable as to cause, and only
the whole composition remains in the mind as a One. For example, the
discoveries of Kepler, Fermat and Leibniz had already provoked Abraham
Kaestner to knock down the remaining pillars of ivory tower mathematics
with his attacks on the a priori acceptance of Euclidean geometry. Once
that was initiated, Kaestner shifted life's trajectory of the young
Gauss, by (as discussed in the last two installments) provoking that
young man to draw out the deeper implications of his first discovery,
the constructability of the 17-gon. That small shift, which Kaestner
induced into Gauss' mind, contained the insights that emerged, years
later, in the investigations of the physical paradoxes just described.

That's where this series is headed.
:::

::: {.addtoany_share_save_container .addtoany_content_bottom}
::: {.a2a_kit .a2a_kit_size_32 .addtoany_list a2a-url="http://lymcanada.org/13/" a2a-title="Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 13 :  The Finer Art of Science"}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F13%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2013%20%3A%20%20The%20Finer%20Art%20of%20Science "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F13%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2013%20%3A%20%20The%20Finer%20Art%20of%20Science "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/google_plus?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F13%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2013%20%3A%20%20The%20Finer%20Art%20of%20Science "Google+"){.a2a_button_google_plus}
[](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd .addtoany_share_save}
:::
:::
:::

[ [ Posted on ]{.screen-reader-text} [February 20, 2010 February 24,
2019](http://lymcanada.org/13/) ]{.posted-on} [ [ [ Author
]{.screen-reader-text} [Bruce
Director](http://lymcanada.org/author/bdirector/){.url .fn .n} ]{.author
.vcard} ]{.byline} [ [ Categories ]{.screen-reader-text}
[EN](http://lymcanada.org/category/en/) , [Riemmann for
Anti-Dummies](http://lymcanada.org/category/science-1/c132-riemmann-for-anti-dummies/)
]{.cat-links}
