::: entry-header
# Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 14 : The Dissonance that Smiled {#riemann-for-anti-dummies-part-14-the-dissonance-that-smiled .entry-title}
:::

::: entry-content
::: pf-content
The Dissonance that Smiled

By all accounts, Descartes, Newton, Euler, and Kant all shared one
common trait: they were grouchy old farts. As such, these poor souls
fled from the dissonance and tension by which the universe presents its
development to the mind of man. Like their Venetian brethren, who only
desired forms of music devoid of Lydian intervals, these minds would not
conceive that God would present to them a challenge, by which their own
cognitive capacity would be improved. Never could they know that mixture
of woefulness and joyfulness that Schiller associates with the sublime.
Yet, there is no need to distinguish whether they were grouchy because
they hated dissonance, or whether that hatred came because they were
grouchy. The lesson to be learned is the same: Grouchy old farts can't
know the minds of Kepler, Leibniz, Kaestner, Gauss, and Riemann, and
people who can't comprehend these great thinkers, become grouchy old
farts.

It is in this spirit, that we turn our pedagogical attention to that
dissonance in the solar system that today we recognize as the asteroid
belt, and the corresponding cognitive transformations that its discovery
and investigation produced.

That our solar system would contain an orbit with the characteristics of
the asteroid belt, was already affecting human cognition, even before
the first asteroid presented itself to human eyes. In his earliest work,
the Mysterium Cosmographicum, Kepler had already noticed an anomaly in
the organization of the planets in the solar system, with respect to the
distances of the known planets from the Sun. While Kepler found that the
orbits of the planets, in first approximation, were consistent with the
five regular Platonic solids, this ordering produced an anomaly between
Mars and Jupiter. This anomaly had impinged on Kepler's thinking, even
before he discovered his polyhedral hypothesis, and, according to his
own description, provoked him to arrive at that discovery.

In trying to determine, "why things were such and not otherwise:
\[namely\] the number, size, and the motion of the circles \[of the
planets\]," Kepler first looked for some ratio of numbers that
corresponded to the observed distances between the planetary orbits.
When this failed, "I tried an approach of remarkable boldness. Between
Jupiter and Mars, I placed a new planet and also another between Venus
and Mercury, which were to be invisible perhaps on account of their tiny
size, and I assigned periodic times to them.... Yet the interposition of
a single planet was not sufficient for the huge gap between Jupiter and
Mars." Failing to find a numerical ratio that corresponded to the
distances, Kepler tried to find a sequence of inscribed and
circumscribed polygons that would correspond to the observed distances.
This, too, failed, in the interval between Jupiter and Mars, provoking
him to discover the correspondence between the size, number, and motion
of the planetary orbits, with the five Platonic solids.

The anomaly between Jupiter and Mars was still indicated under the
polyhedral hypothesis, by the placement of the tetrahedron in this gap,
as the tetrahedron is the one solid which is its own dual.

This anomaly provoked Kepler to further investigate, and, upon closer
examination of the orbit of Mars, he discovered the non-uniform nature
of the planets' orbits. Now, he had a further dissonance. Circumscribing
and inscribing spheres around the Platonic solids gave the distances
between the circles of the orbits, but the orbits were not circular.
They were eccentric. The question posed by this dissonance was: what
governed the eccentricities, or, in other words, why was each planet's
eccentricity "this way and not other"?

As he wrote in the Harmonies of the World, "As far as the proportion of
the planetary orbits is concerned, between pairs of neighboring orbits,
indeed it is always such as to make it readily apparent that in each
case, the proportion is close to the unique proportion of the spheres of
one of the solid figures; that is to say the proportion of the
circumscribed sphere of the figures to the inscribed sphere. However, it
is not definitely equal, as I once dared to promise for eventually
perfected astronomy....

"From that fact it is evident that the actual proportions of the
planetary distances from the sun have not been taken from the regular
figures alone; for the Creator, the actual fount of geometry who, as
Plato wrote, practices eternal geometry, does not stray from his own
archetype. And that could certainly be inferred from the very fact that
all the planets change their intervals over definite periods of time, in
such a way that each one of them has two distinctive distances from the
Sun, its greatest and its least; and comparison of distances from the
Sun between pairs of planets is possible in four ways, either of
greatest distances or of the least or of the distances on opposite sides
when they are furthest from each other, or when they are closest. Thus,
the comparisons between pair and pair of neighboring planets are twenty
in number, whereas on the other hand there are only five solid figures.
However, it is fitting that the Creator, if He paid attention to the
proportion of the orbits in general, also paid attention to the
proportion between the varying distances of the individual orbits in
particular, and that that attention should be the same in each case, and
that one should be linked with another. On careful consideration, we
shall plainly reach the following conclusion, that for establishing both
the diameters and the eccentricities of the orbits in conjunction more
basic principles are needed in addition to the five regular solids."

The "more basic principles" that Kepler discovered concerned the
harmonic relationship among the extreme speeds of neighboring planets.
The planet's speed at any moment is a function of its distance from the
Sun at that moment; the slowest speed of the planet is at its maximum
distance from the Sun (aphelion) and its fastest speed is at its minimum
distance from the Sun (perihelion). These extremes are themselves a
reflection of the planet's eccentricity. The solar system chose, so to
speak, those eccentricities for the planets that produced the speeds,
according to a "more basic principle". That principle was reflected in
the harmonic relationships among those speeds.

Kepler measured those speeds by the arc the planet traversed at
perihelion and aphelion, as seen from the Sun, during one Earth day. The
results were:

        Saturn  at aphelion-  1'30"; at perihelion-  2'15";
    Jupiter at aphelion-  4'30"; at perihelion-  5'30";
    Mars    at aphelion- 26'14"; at perihelion- 38' 1";
    Earth   at aphelion- 57' 3"; at perihelion- 61'18";
    Venus   at aphelion- 94'50"; at perihelion- 97'37";
    Mercury at aphelion-147' 1"; at perihelion-384' 0";
       

When these speeds are compared between neighboring planets, their ratios
correspond to harmonic musical intervals. Each pair of planets makes two
intervals: a converging interval between the perihelion speed of the
outer planet with the aphelion speed of the inner one; a diverging
interval between the aphelion speed of the outer planet with the
perihelion speed of the inner one. These intervals according to Kepler
are:

        Saturn - Jupiter diverging 1/3;  converging 1/2;
    Jupiter- Mars    diverging 1/8;  converging 5/24;
    Mars   - Earth   diverging 5/12; converging 2/3;
    Earth  - Venus   diverging 3/5;  converging 5/8;
    Venus  - Mercury diverging 1/4;  converging 3/5;
       

These intervals correspond to those Kepler derived for musical intervals
with one exception. The converging interval between Jupiter and Mars,
deviated from Kepler's musical intervals by a diesis (otherwise called a
quarter-tone). The diesis, Kepler said, is "the smallest interval, by
which the human voice in figured melody is almost perpetually out of
tune. However, in the single case of Jupiter and Mars, the discrepancy
is between a diesis and a semitone. It is therefore evident that this
mutual concession on all sides hold exceedingly good."

That small dissonance would later reveal itself to be a reflection of a
further "more basic principle", whose expression Gauss and Riemann would
later provide.
:::

::: {.addtoany_share_save_container .addtoany_content_bottom}
::: {.a2a_kit .a2a_kit_size_32 .addtoany_list a2a-url="http://lymcanada.org/14/" a2a-title="Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 14 :  The Dissonance that Smiled"}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F14%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2014%20%3A%20%20The%20Dissonance%20that%20Smiled "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F14%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2014%20%3A%20%20The%20Dissonance%20that%20Smiled "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/google_plus?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F14%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2014%20%3A%20%20The%20Dissonance%20that%20Smiled "Google+"){.a2a_button_google_plus}
[](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd .addtoany_share_save}
:::
:::
:::

[ [ Posted on ]{.screen-reader-text} [February 20, 2010 February 24,
2019](http://lymcanada.org/14/) ]{.posted-on} [ [ [ Author
]{.screen-reader-text} [Bruce
Director](http://lymcanada.org/author/bdirector/){.url .fn .n} ]{.author
.vcard} ]{.byline} [ [ Categories ]{.screen-reader-text}
[EN](http://lymcanada.org/category/en/) , [Riemmann for
Anti-Dummies](http://lymcanada.org/category/science-1/c132-riemmann-for-anti-dummies/)
]{.cat-links}

::: entry-header
# Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 14 : The Dissonance that Smiled {#riemann-for-anti-dummies-part-14-the-dissonance-that-smiled-1 .entry-title}
:::

::: entry-content
::: pf-content
The Dissonance that Smiled

By all accounts, Descartes, Newton, Euler, and Kant all shared one
common trait: they were grouchy old farts. As such, these poor souls
fled from the dissonance and tension by which the universe presents its
development to the mind of man. Like their Venetian brethren, who only
desired forms of music devoid of Lydian intervals, these minds would not
conceive that God would present to them a challenge, by which their own
cognitive capacity would be improved. Never could they know that mixture
of woefulness and joyfulness that Schiller associates with the sublime.
Yet, there is no need to distinguish whether they were grouchy because
they hated dissonance, or whether that hatred came because they were
grouchy. The lesson to be learned is the same: Grouchy old farts can't
know the minds of Kepler, Leibniz, Kaestner, Gauss, and Riemann, and
people who can't comprehend these great thinkers, become grouchy old
farts.

It is in this spirit, that we turn our pedagogical attention to that
dissonance in the solar system that today we recognize as the asteroid
belt, and the corresponding cognitive transformations that its discovery
and investigation produced.

That our solar system would contain an orbit with the characteristics of
the asteroid belt, was already affecting human cognition, even before
the first asteroid presented itself to human eyes. In his earliest work,
the Mysterium Cosmographicum, Kepler had already noticed an anomaly in
the organization of the planets in the solar system, with respect to the
distances of the known planets from the Sun. While Kepler found that the
orbits of the planets, in first approximation, were consistent with the
five regular Platonic solids, this ordering produced an anomaly between
Mars and Jupiter. This anomaly had impinged on Kepler's thinking, even
before he discovered his polyhedral hypothesis, and, according to his
own description, provoked him to arrive at that discovery.

In trying to determine, "why things were such and not otherwise:
\[namely\] the number, size, and the motion of the circles \[of the
planets\]," Kepler first looked for some ratio of numbers that
corresponded to the observed distances between the planetary orbits.
When this failed, "I tried an approach of remarkable boldness. Between
Jupiter and Mars, I placed a new planet and also another between Venus
and Mercury, which were to be invisible perhaps on account of their tiny
size, and I assigned periodic times to them.... Yet the interposition of
a single planet was not sufficient for the huge gap between Jupiter and
Mars." Failing to find a numerical ratio that corresponded to the
distances, Kepler tried to find a sequence of inscribed and
circumscribed polygons that would correspond to the observed distances.
This, too, failed, in the interval between Jupiter and Mars, provoking
him to discover the correspondence between the size, number, and motion
of the planetary orbits, with the five Platonic solids.

The anomaly between Jupiter and Mars was still indicated under the
polyhedral hypothesis, by the placement of the tetrahedron in this gap,
as the tetrahedron is the one solid which is its own dual.

This anomaly provoked Kepler to further investigate, and, upon closer
examination of the orbit of Mars, he discovered the non-uniform nature
of the planets' orbits. Now, he had a further dissonance. Circumscribing
and inscribing spheres around the Platonic solids gave the distances
between the circles of the orbits, but the orbits were not circular.
They were eccentric. The question posed by this dissonance was: what
governed the eccentricities, or, in other words, why was each planet's
eccentricity "this way and not other"?

As he wrote in the Harmonies of the World, "As far as the proportion of
the planetary orbits is concerned, between pairs of neighboring orbits,
indeed it is always such as to make it readily apparent that in each
case, the proportion is close to the unique proportion of the spheres of
one of the solid figures; that is to say the proportion of the
circumscribed sphere of the figures to the inscribed sphere. However, it
is not definitely equal, as I once dared to promise for eventually
perfected astronomy....

"From that fact it is evident that the actual proportions of the
planetary distances from the sun have not been taken from the regular
figures alone; for the Creator, the actual fount of geometry who, as
Plato wrote, practices eternal geometry, does not stray from his own
archetype. And that could certainly be inferred from the very fact that
all the planets change their intervals over definite periods of time, in
such a way that each one of them has two distinctive distances from the
Sun, its greatest and its least; and comparison of distances from the
Sun between pairs of planets is possible in four ways, either of
greatest distances or of the least or of the distances on opposite sides
when they are furthest from each other, or when they are closest. Thus,
the comparisons between pair and pair of neighboring planets are twenty
in number, whereas on the other hand there are only five solid figures.
However, it is fitting that the Creator, if He paid attention to the
proportion of the orbits in general, also paid attention to the
proportion between the varying distances of the individual orbits in
particular, and that that attention should be the same in each case, and
that one should be linked with another. On careful consideration, we
shall plainly reach the following conclusion, that for establishing both
the diameters and the eccentricities of the orbits in conjunction more
basic principles are needed in addition to the five regular solids."

The "more basic principles" that Kepler discovered concerned the
harmonic relationship among the extreme speeds of neighboring planets.
The planet's speed at any moment is a function of its distance from the
Sun at that moment; the slowest speed of the planet is at its maximum
distance from the Sun (aphelion) and its fastest speed is at its minimum
distance from the Sun (perihelion). These extremes are themselves a
reflection of the planet's eccentricity. The solar system chose, so to
speak, those eccentricities for the planets that produced the speeds,
according to a "more basic principle". That principle was reflected in
the harmonic relationships among those speeds.

Kepler measured those speeds by the arc the planet traversed at
perihelion and aphelion, as seen from the Sun, during one Earth day. The
results were:

        Saturn  at aphelion-  1'30"; at perihelion-  2'15";
    Jupiter at aphelion-  4'30"; at perihelion-  5'30";
    Mars    at aphelion- 26'14"; at perihelion- 38' 1";
    Earth   at aphelion- 57' 3"; at perihelion- 61'18";
    Venus   at aphelion- 94'50"; at perihelion- 97'37";
    Mercury at aphelion-147' 1"; at perihelion-384' 0";
       

When these speeds are compared between neighboring planets, their ratios
correspond to harmonic musical intervals. Each pair of planets makes two
intervals: a converging interval between the perihelion speed of the
outer planet with the aphelion speed of the inner one; a diverging
interval between the aphelion speed of the outer planet with the
perihelion speed of the inner one. These intervals according to Kepler
are:

        Saturn - Jupiter diverging 1/3;  converging 1/2;
    Jupiter- Mars    diverging 1/8;  converging 5/24;
    Mars   - Earth   diverging 5/12; converging 2/3;
    Earth  - Venus   diverging 3/5;  converging 5/8;
    Venus  - Mercury diverging 1/4;  converging 3/5;
       

These intervals correspond to those Kepler derived for musical intervals
with one exception. The converging interval between Jupiter and Mars,
deviated from Kepler's musical intervals by a diesis (otherwise called a
quarter-tone). The diesis, Kepler said, is "the smallest interval, by
which the human voice in figured melody is almost perpetually out of
tune. However, in the single case of Jupiter and Mars, the discrepancy
is between a diesis and a semitone. It is therefore evident that this
mutual concession on all sides hold exceedingly good."

That small dissonance would later reveal itself to be a reflection of a
further "more basic principle", whose expression Gauss and Riemann would
later provide.
:::

::: {.addtoany_share_save_container .addtoany_content_bottom}
::: {.a2a_kit .a2a_kit_size_32 .addtoany_list a2a-url="http://lymcanada.org/14/" a2a-title="Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 14 :  The Dissonance that Smiled"}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F14%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2014%20%3A%20%20The%20Dissonance%20that%20Smiled "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F14%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2014%20%3A%20%20The%20Dissonance%20that%20Smiled "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/google_plus?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F14%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2014%20%3A%20%20The%20Dissonance%20that%20Smiled "Google+"){.a2a_button_google_plus}
[](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd .addtoany_share_save}
:::
:::
:::

[ [ Posted on ]{.screen-reader-text} [February 20, 2010 February 24,
2019](http://lymcanada.org/14/) ]{.posted-on} [ [ [ Author
]{.screen-reader-text} [Bruce
Director](http://lymcanada.org/author/bdirector/){.url .fn .n} ]{.author
.vcard} ]{.byline} [ [ Categories ]{.screen-reader-text}
[EN](http://lymcanada.org/category/en/) , [Riemmann for
Anti-Dummies](http://lymcanada.org/category/science-1/c132-riemmann-for-anti-dummies/)
]{.cat-links}
