::: entry-header
# Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 15 : The Solar System's Harmonic Twist {#riemann-for-anti-dummies-part-15-the-solar-systems-harmonic-twist .entry-title}
:::

::: entry-content
::: pf-content
The Solar System's Harmonic Twist

Significant insight can be obtained, for those wishing to master the art
of changing one's own axioms, by re-living Kepler's transformation of
his own thinking, from his initial hypothesis connecting the planetary
orbits to the five Platonic solids, to the supersession of that
hypothesis, under his concept of "World Harmony."

As presented in last week's installment, Kepler sought the reason
underlying the ordering of the solar system by investigating, "why
things were such and not otherwise: (namely) the number, size, and the
motion of the circles." The anomaly between Mars and Jupiter, initially
investigated in terms of the relationship of the distances between the
planetary orbits, provoked Kepler to reject his initial attempts to
answer this question using simple numerical values, or, geometrical
relationships among plane figures. After much work, Kepler found that
the underlying reason for the number and size of the planetary orbits
corresponded to the ordering of five Platonic solids.

(An example of the this anomaly between Mars and Jupiter was recently
pointed out by Jonathan Tennenbaum. If one extrapolates from the
relationship of the distances between the orbits of Mars and Earth
outward, one calculates two planetary orbits between Mars and Jupiter.
On the other hand, extrapolating from the relationship of the distance
between Jupiter and Saturn inward, only one planetary orbit between Mars
and Jupiter is obtained.)

As to the motions of the planets, Kepler later discovered that his
initial concept had to be superseded by a "more basic principle."
Specifically, the non-uniform motion, i.e., eccentric, motion of the
planets showed that the planetary orbits were not fixed circles, such as
those found on spheres circumscribing and inscribing Platonic solids.
Rather, the orbits were regions in which the planets moved
non-uniformly, getting closer and farther from the Sun as they moved
around it. Thus, the solids were not sufficient to account for these
eccentricities.

But, what principle was determining these eccentricities? This presented
a far different problem than determining merely the distances between
the planetary orbits. Specifically, what is the appropriate measure of a
non-uniform orbit? Kepler's equal area principle is such an appropriate
measure within an orbit. But, what is an appropriate measure for
determining intervals among eccentric orbits? Kepler's so-called third
principle, (that the mean distance from the Sun equals the 3/2 power of
the periodic time), is a first approximation of such a measure, but it
doesn't express, "why these eccentricities and not others?"

Kepler recognized that the eccentricity of a planets' orbit is uniquely
determined by its singularities, specifically its fastest speed at
perihelion and its slowest speed a aphelion. These extreme motions
reflect the intention of the planet's action in the intervening
intervals. In other words, how much the planet speeds up, at each
moment, from aphelion to perihelion, is a function of what it is to
become at perihelion, and conversely, in the interval from perihelion
back to aphelion. Thus, the principle determining these extremes, in
turn determines the characteristic eccentricity of the whole orbit,
which in turn, determines the distances between the planetary orbits.

As Kepler stated, "It was good, that for the formation of the distances
the solid figures should give way to the harmonic relationships, and the
greater harmonies between pairs of planets, to the universal harmonies
of all, so far as this was necessary."

Since Kepler is almost unique among scientific discovers in presenting
to us not only his discovery, but also the change in his own thinking
which brought him to it, we quote at length from the concluding "envoi"
of his "Harmonies of the World":

"For where there is a choice between different things which do not allow
each other to have sole possession, in that case the higher are to be
preferred, and the lower must give way, as far as is necessary, which
the very word "cosmos," which means "decoration," seems to argue. But
harmonic decoration is as far above the simple geometrical as life is
above the body, or form above matter.

"For just as life completes the bodies of animate beings, because they
were born to lead it, which follows from the archetype of the world,
which is the actual divine essence, so motion measures out the regions
allotted to the planets, to each its own, as a region has been assigned
to a star so that it could move. But the five solid figures, in virtue
of the word itself, relate to the spaces of the regions, and to the
number of them and of the bodies; but the harmonies to the motions.
Again, as matter is diffuse and unlimited in itself, but form is
limited, unified, and itself the boundary of matter; so also the number
of the geometrical proportions is infinite, the harmonies are
few....Therefore, as matter strives for form, as a rough stone of the
correct size indeed, strives for the Idea of the human form, so the
geometrical proportions in the figures strive for harmonies; not so as
to build and shape them, but because this matter fits more neatly to
this form, this size of rock to this effigy, and also this proportion in
a figure to this harmony, and therefore so that they may be built and
shaped further, the matter in fact by its own form, the rock by the
chisel into the appearance of an animate being, but the proportion of
the spheres of the figures by its own, that is, by close and fitting
harmony.

"What has been said up to this point will be made clearer by the story
of my discoveries. When, twenty four years ago I had engaged in this
study, I first enquired whether the individual circles of the planets
were separated by equal distances from each other (for in Copernicus the
spheres, are separated, and do not mutually touch each other),. Of
course, I acknowledged nothing as more splendid than the relationship of
equality. However, it lacks a head and a tail, for this material
equality provided no definite number for the moving bodies, no definite
size for the distances. Therefore, I thought about the similarity of the
distances to the spheres, that is about their proportion. But the same
complaint followed, for although in fact distances between the spheres
emerged which were certainly unequal, yet they were not unequally
unequal, as Copernicus would have it, nor was the size of proportion nor
the number of the spheres obtained. I moved on to the regular plane
figures; they produced the distances in accordance with the ascription
of their circles, but still in no definite number. I came to the five
solids; in this case they revealed both the number of the bodies and
nearly the right size for the intervals so much so that I appealed over
the remaining discrepancy to the state of accuracy of astronomy. The
accuracy of astronomy has been perfected in the course of twenty years;'
and see! There was still a discrepancy between the distances and the
solid figures, and the reasons for the very unequal distribution of the
eccentricities among the planets were not yet apparent. Of course in
this house of the cosmos I was looking for nothing but the stones of
more elegant form, but of a form appropriate to stones not knowing that
the Architect had shaped them into a fully detailed effigy of a living
body. So little by little, especially in these last three years, I came
to the harmonies, deserting the solid figures over fine details, both
because the former were based on the parts of the form which the
ultimate hand had impressed, but the figures from matter, which in the
cosmos is the number of the bodies and the bare breadth of their spaces,
and also because the former yielded the eccentricities, which the latter
did not even promise. That is to say the former provided the nose and
eyes and other limbs of the statue, for which these latter had only
prescribed the external quantity of bare mass.

"Hence just as the bodies of animate beings have not been made, and a
mass of stone is not usually made, according to the pure norm of some
geometrical figure, but something is removed from the external round
shape, however elegant (though the correct amount of bulk remains) so
that the body can take on the organs necessary to life, and the stone
the likeness of an animate being, similarly also the proportion which
the solid figures were to prescribe for the planetary spheres, as lower,
and having regard only in a body of a particular size and to matter,
must have given way to the harmonies, as much as was necessary for the
former as to be able to stand close and to adorn the motions of the
globes."

**A Still More Basic Principle**

So, the geometrical proportions of the solids give way to the more basic
principle of the harmonic principles. What principle, therefore,
determines the harmonies?

Kepler himself stated that the harmonic proportions are determined by
the ear, not numerical values. To what does the ear turn? To the
universal principles of Classical artistic composition, as exemplified
by J.S. Bach's well-tempered polyphonic compositions. It is in the
domain of these compositions (Ideas) from which the values of the
well-tempered intervals are derived, which, in turn, determine the
harmonic proportions from which the planetary orbits derive their
eccentricities.

With Piazzi's discovery of the asteroid Ceres, Gauss' subsequent
determination of its orbit, and the follow up discoveries of the
asteroids Pallas, Juno and Vesta, Kepler's principles were confirmed
anew. The motion of each asteroid conformed to Keplerian principles,
moving in elliptical paths with equal areas measuring equal portions of
their periods, and, their mean distances from the Sun equaling the 3/2
power of their periodic times.

But, there was a twist. It now became possible to measure, in these
orbits, cyclical changes in the eccentricities, that were occurring, but
were hitherto beyond measurement, in all the planetary orbits.
Furthermore, unlike the orbits of the major planets, which enclosed one
another, the asteroid orbits intertwined. For example, at perihelion
Pallas was closer to the Sun than Ceres, but at aphelion, Ceres was
closer to the Sun than Pallas. This intertwining suggests the asteroids'
orbits are both many individual Keplerian orbits, and one whole
Keplerian orbit at the same time. What then, is the still more basic
principle that governs the solar system which contains this new type of
orbit represented by the asteroids?

The initial work on this was done by Gauss, whose investigation into the
changing eccentricities and the intertwinings provoked his creation of
new mathematical metaphors, which, like Leibniz' calculus, had
applications far beyond the original paradoxes that gave rise to them.
The changing eccentricities provoked Gauss to conceive of the orbits as
elliptical rings in which the mass of the planet, or asteroid, was
distributed in the ring according to Kepler's equal area principle. (For
a more complete treatment of Gauss' concept, see the pedagogical series,
"Dance With the Planets" 98406bmd002; 98416bmd001; 98426bmd001 )

Gauss also considered the implications of the intertwining of the
asteroid orbits, for the geometrical characteristics of the solar system
as a whole. Gauss took this up in a preliminary way in an 1804 paper,
"On the Determination of the Geocentric Positions of the Planets." Here
Gauss considered the inverse of the problem he confronted in the
determination of the Ceres orbit. In that case, Gauss had a few
geocentric positions of Ceres, from which he had to determine its
heliocentric orbit. Now he considered the inversion. What
characteristics of a heliocentric orbit govern the geometry of its
geocentric positions. For this, he explicitly turned to Leibniz' and
Carnot's "Geometry of Position."

Each planet or asteroid makes a circuit through the zodiac. But, since
the Earth is also moving, the zodiac changes its position with respect
to an observer on the Earth. Consequently, the locus of all geocentric
positions of a planet or asteroid form a zone on the celestial sphere,
that Gauss called its "zodiacus." The determination of the boundaries of
that zone required the construction of function that mapped the changes
of the heliocentric positions of the planet and the Earth, onto the
celestial sphere. While Gauss was able to calculate specific values for
this function, more importantly, he investigated its general
characteristics. He showed that the nature of that zodiacus depends on
the relationship of the planet's orbit to the Earth's. Either the
planets' orbit is completely inside the Earth's, completely outside, or,
it overlaps. Gauss showed that the first two situations determined a
zodiacus with definite boundaries, but, in the third case those
boundaries were indeterminable. He noted, ironically, that, the
implications of this paradox had, until then, been avoided, because none
of the known planets or asteroids, had ever appeared in strange places,
such as near the poles of the ecliptic! Nevertheless, Gauss was pointing
out a crucial principle on which Riemann would later rely. Specifically,
that orbits that completely enclose one another defined completely
different geometrical characteristics than those that overlapped.

(If you want to have some fun, take two rings, one bigger than the
other. Study the relationship between positions on the two rings when
the smaller ring is inside the larger. Now, compare these relationships
with two rings that are interlinked. I leave it to the reader to
discover the difference on your own.)

Finally, think of the implications of these intertwining asteroid orbits
for Kepler's harmonic proportions. Preliminary calculations performed by
this author for 10 asteroids show that when the extreme speeds of each
asteroid are individually compared with the extreme speeds of Jupiter
and Mars, similar harmonic proportions to those Kepler found for the
major planets occur. The diverging and converging intervals each
asteroid makes with Jupiter correspond to intervals Kepler would
consider consonant. With Mars, the diverging intervals are consonant,
while the converging intervals correspond to the deisis that Kepler
found between Jupiter and Mars.

The twist comes up in forming intervals among the asteroids themselves.
Since their orbits overlap the very meaning of converging and diverging
intervals is different than in the intervals between the major planets.
For example, when is Ceres converging towards Pallas or diverging away
from it? When both are moving away from the Sun, Ceres is getting closer
to Pallas, while, when both are moving closer to the Sun, they become
divergent. Unlike the major planets, however, the point of divergence
and convergence does not occur at the extreme positions. And since the
eccentricities of the asteroids's orbits are changing, where these
orbits cross over from diverging to converging is itself changing. Now,
think of the connectivity involved when thinking of this relationship
among many asteroids, not just two, as in this example!

This braided, overlapping characteristic is not limited to orbits within
the range of the asteroid belt. In fact, the solar system is filled with
orbits that similarly overlap, including asteroids whose orbits overlap
the Earth's. Such overlapping orbits, suggests a new set of harmonic
relationships, akin to the transformation of Bach's well-tempered
polyphony by Beethoven in his late quartets.
:::

::: {.addtoany_share_save_container .addtoany_content_bottom}
::: {.a2a_kit .a2a_kit_size_32 .addtoany_list a2a-url="http://lymcanada.org/15/" a2a-title="Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 15 :  The Solar System’s Harmonic Twist"}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F15%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2015%20%3A%20%20The%20Solar%20System%E2%80%99s%20Harmonic%20Twist "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F15%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2015%20%3A%20%20The%20Solar%20System%E2%80%99s%20Harmonic%20Twist "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/google_plus?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F15%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2015%20%3A%20%20The%20Solar%20System%E2%80%99s%20Harmonic%20Twist "Google+"){.a2a_button_google_plus}
[](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd .addtoany_share_save}
:::
:::
:::

[ [ Posted on ]{.screen-reader-text} [February 20, 2010 February 24,
2019](http://lymcanada.org/15/) ]{.posted-on} [ [ [ Author
]{.screen-reader-text} [Bruce
Director](http://lymcanada.org/author/bdirector/){.url .fn .n} ]{.author
.vcard} ]{.byline} [ [ Categories ]{.screen-reader-text}
[EN](http://lymcanada.org/category/en/) , [Riemmann for
Anti-Dummies](http://lymcanada.org/category/science-1/c132-riemmann-for-anti-dummies/)
]{.cat-links}

::: entry-header
# Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 15 : The Solar System's Harmonic Twist {#riemann-for-anti-dummies-part-15-the-solar-systems-harmonic-twist-1 .entry-title}
:::

::: entry-content
::: pf-content
The Solar System's Harmonic Twist

Significant insight can be obtained, for those wishing to master the art
of changing one's own axioms, by re-living Kepler's transformation of
his own thinking, from his initial hypothesis connecting the planetary
orbits to the five Platonic solids, to the supersession of that
hypothesis, under his concept of "World Harmony."

As presented in last week's installment, Kepler sought the reason
underlying the ordering of the solar system by investigating, "why
things were such and not otherwise: (namely) the number, size, and the
motion of the circles." The anomaly between Mars and Jupiter, initially
investigated in terms of the relationship of the distances between the
planetary orbits, provoked Kepler to reject his initial attempts to
answer this question using simple numerical values, or, geometrical
relationships among plane figures. After much work, Kepler found that
the underlying reason for the number and size of the planetary orbits
corresponded to the ordering of five Platonic solids.

(An example of the this anomaly between Mars and Jupiter was recently
pointed out by Jonathan Tennenbaum. If one extrapolates from the
relationship of the distances between the orbits of Mars and Earth
outward, one calculates two planetary orbits between Mars and Jupiter.
On the other hand, extrapolating from the relationship of the distance
between Jupiter and Saturn inward, only one planetary orbit between Mars
and Jupiter is obtained.)

As to the motions of the planets, Kepler later discovered that his
initial concept had to be superseded by a "more basic principle."
Specifically, the non-uniform motion, i.e., eccentric, motion of the
planets showed that the planetary orbits were not fixed circles, such as
those found on spheres circumscribing and inscribing Platonic solids.
Rather, the orbits were regions in which the planets moved
non-uniformly, getting closer and farther from the Sun as they moved
around it. Thus, the solids were not sufficient to account for these
eccentricities.

But, what principle was determining these eccentricities? This presented
a far different problem than determining merely the distances between
the planetary orbits. Specifically, what is the appropriate measure of a
non-uniform orbit? Kepler's equal area principle is such an appropriate
measure within an orbit. But, what is an appropriate measure for
determining intervals among eccentric orbits? Kepler's so-called third
principle, (that the mean distance from the Sun equals the 3/2 power of
the periodic time), is a first approximation of such a measure, but it
doesn't express, "why these eccentricities and not others?"

Kepler recognized that the eccentricity of a planets' orbit is uniquely
determined by its singularities, specifically its fastest speed at
perihelion and its slowest speed a aphelion. These extreme motions
reflect the intention of the planet's action in the intervening
intervals. In other words, how much the planet speeds up, at each
moment, from aphelion to perihelion, is a function of what it is to
become at perihelion, and conversely, in the interval from perihelion
back to aphelion. Thus, the principle determining these extremes, in
turn determines the characteristic eccentricity of the whole orbit,
which in turn, determines the distances between the planetary orbits.

As Kepler stated, "It was good, that for the formation of the distances
the solid figures should give way to the harmonic relationships, and the
greater harmonies between pairs of planets, to the universal harmonies
of all, so far as this was necessary."

Since Kepler is almost unique among scientific discovers in presenting
to us not only his discovery, but also the change in his own thinking
which brought him to it, we quote at length from the concluding "envoi"
of his "Harmonies of the World":

"For where there is a choice between different things which do not allow
each other to have sole possession, in that case the higher are to be
preferred, and the lower must give way, as far as is necessary, which
the very word "cosmos," which means "decoration," seems to argue. But
harmonic decoration is as far above the simple geometrical as life is
above the body, or form above matter.

"For just as life completes the bodies of animate beings, because they
were born to lead it, which follows from the archetype of the world,
which is the actual divine essence, so motion measures out the regions
allotted to the planets, to each its own, as a region has been assigned
to a star so that it could move. But the five solid figures, in virtue
of the word itself, relate to the spaces of the regions, and to the
number of them and of the bodies; but the harmonies to the motions.
Again, as matter is diffuse and unlimited in itself, but form is
limited, unified, and itself the boundary of matter; so also the number
of the geometrical proportions is infinite, the harmonies are
few....Therefore, as matter strives for form, as a rough stone of the
correct size indeed, strives for the Idea of the human form, so the
geometrical proportions in the figures strive for harmonies; not so as
to build and shape them, but because this matter fits more neatly to
this form, this size of rock to this effigy, and also this proportion in
a figure to this harmony, and therefore so that they may be built and
shaped further, the matter in fact by its own form, the rock by the
chisel into the appearance of an animate being, but the proportion of
the spheres of the figures by its own, that is, by close and fitting
harmony.

"What has been said up to this point will be made clearer by the story
of my discoveries. When, twenty four years ago I had engaged in this
study, I first enquired whether the individual circles of the planets
were separated by equal distances from each other (for in Copernicus the
spheres, are separated, and do not mutually touch each other),. Of
course, I acknowledged nothing as more splendid than the relationship of
equality. However, it lacks a head and a tail, for this material
equality provided no definite number for the moving bodies, no definite
size for the distances. Therefore, I thought about the similarity of the
distances to the spheres, that is about their proportion. But the same
complaint followed, for although in fact distances between the spheres
emerged which were certainly unequal, yet they were not unequally
unequal, as Copernicus would have it, nor was the size of proportion nor
the number of the spheres obtained. I moved on to the regular plane
figures; they produced the distances in accordance with the ascription
of their circles, but still in no definite number. I came to the five
solids; in this case they revealed both the number of the bodies and
nearly the right size for the intervals so much so that I appealed over
the remaining discrepancy to the state of accuracy of astronomy. The
accuracy of astronomy has been perfected in the course of twenty years;'
and see! There was still a discrepancy between the distances and the
solid figures, and the reasons for the very unequal distribution of the
eccentricities among the planets were not yet apparent. Of course in
this house of the cosmos I was looking for nothing but the stones of
more elegant form, but of a form appropriate to stones not knowing that
the Architect had shaped them into a fully detailed effigy of a living
body. So little by little, especially in these last three years, I came
to the harmonies, deserting the solid figures over fine details, both
because the former were based on the parts of the form which the
ultimate hand had impressed, but the figures from matter, which in the
cosmos is the number of the bodies and the bare breadth of their spaces,
and also because the former yielded the eccentricities, which the latter
did not even promise. That is to say the former provided the nose and
eyes and other limbs of the statue, for which these latter had only
prescribed the external quantity of bare mass.

"Hence just as the bodies of animate beings have not been made, and a
mass of stone is not usually made, according to the pure norm of some
geometrical figure, but something is removed from the external round
shape, however elegant (though the correct amount of bulk remains) so
that the body can take on the organs necessary to life, and the stone
the likeness of an animate being, similarly also the proportion which
the solid figures were to prescribe for the planetary spheres, as lower,
and having regard only in a body of a particular size and to matter,
must have given way to the harmonies, as much as was necessary for the
former as to be able to stand close and to adorn the motions of the
globes."

**A Still More Basic Principle**

So, the geometrical proportions of the solids give way to the more basic
principle of the harmonic principles. What principle, therefore,
determines the harmonies?

Kepler himself stated that the harmonic proportions are determined by
the ear, not numerical values. To what does the ear turn? To the
universal principles of Classical artistic composition, as exemplified
by J.S. Bach's well-tempered polyphonic compositions. It is in the
domain of these compositions (Ideas) from which the values of the
well-tempered intervals are derived, which, in turn, determine the
harmonic proportions from which the planetary orbits derive their
eccentricities.

With Piazzi's discovery of the asteroid Ceres, Gauss' subsequent
determination of its orbit, and the follow up discoveries of the
asteroids Pallas, Juno and Vesta, Kepler's principles were confirmed
anew. The motion of each asteroid conformed to Keplerian principles,
moving in elliptical paths with equal areas measuring equal portions of
their periods, and, their mean distances from the Sun equaling the 3/2
power of their periodic times.

But, there was a twist. It now became possible to measure, in these
orbits, cyclical changes in the eccentricities, that were occurring, but
were hitherto beyond measurement, in all the planetary orbits.
Furthermore, unlike the orbits of the major planets, which enclosed one
another, the asteroid orbits intertwined. For example, at perihelion
Pallas was closer to the Sun than Ceres, but at aphelion, Ceres was
closer to the Sun than Pallas. This intertwining suggests the asteroids'
orbits are both many individual Keplerian orbits, and one whole
Keplerian orbit at the same time. What then, is the still more basic
principle that governs the solar system which contains this new type of
orbit represented by the asteroids?

The initial work on this was done by Gauss, whose investigation into the
changing eccentricities and the intertwinings provoked his creation of
new mathematical metaphors, which, like Leibniz' calculus, had
applications far beyond the original paradoxes that gave rise to them.
The changing eccentricities provoked Gauss to conceive of the orbits as
elliptical rings in which the mass of the planet, or asteroid, was
distributed in the ring according to Kepler's equal area principle. (For
a more complete treatment of Gauss' concept, see the pedagogical series,
"Dance With the Planets" 98406bmd002; 98416bmd001; 98426bmd001 )

Gauss also considered the implications of the intertwining of the
asteroid orbits, for the geometrical characteristics of the solar system
as a whole. Gauss took this up in a preliminary way in an 1804 paper,
"On the Determination of the Geocentric Positions of the Planets." Here
Gauss considered the inverse of the problem he confronted in the
determination of the Ceres orbit. In that case, Gauss had a few
geocentric positions of Ceres, from which he had to determine its
heliocentric orbit. Now he considered the inversion. What
characteristics of a heliocentric orbit govern the geometry of its
geocentric positions. For this, he explicitly turned to Leibniz' and
Carnot's "Geometry of Position."

Each planet or asteroid makes a circuit through the zodiac. But, since
the Earth is also moving, the zodiac changes its position with respect
to an observer on the Earth. Consequently, the locus of all geocentric
positions of a planet or asteroid form a zone on the celestial sphere,
that Gauss called its "zodiacus." The determination of the boundaries of
that zone required the construction of function that mapped the changes
of the heliocentric positions of the planet and the Earth, onto the
celestial sphere. While Gauss was able to calculate specific values for
this function, more importantly, he investigated its general
characteristics. He showed that the nature of that zodiacus depends on
the relationship of the planet's orbit to the Earth's. Either the
planets' orbit is completely inside the Earth's, completely outside, or,
it overlaps. Gauss showed that the first two situations determined a
zodiacus with definite boundaries, but, in the third case those
boundaries were indeterminable. He noted, ironically, that, the
implications of this paradox had, until then, been avoided, because none
of the known planets or asteroids, had ever appeared in strange places,
such as near the poles of the ecliptic! Nevertheless, Gauss was pointing
out a crucial principle on which Riemann would later rely. Specifically,
that orbits that completely enclose one another defined completely
different geometrical characteristics than those that overlapped.

(If you want to have some fun, take two rings, one bigger than the
other. Study the relationship between positions on the two rings when
the smaller ring is inside the larger. Now, compare these relationships
with two rings that are interlinked. I leave it to the reader to
discover the difference on your own.)

Finally, think of the implications of these intertwining asteroid orbits
for Kepler's harmonic proportions. Preliminary calculations performed by
this author for 10 asteroids show that when the extreme speeds of each
asteroid are individually compared with the extreme speeds of Jupiter
and Mars, similar harmonic proportions to those Kepler found for the
major planets occur. The diverging and converging intervals each
asteroid makes with Jupiter correspond to intervals Kepler would
consider consonant. With Mars, the diverging intervals are consonant,
while the converging intervals correspond to the deisis that Kepler
found between Jupiter and Mars.

The twist comes up in forming intervals among the asteroids themselves.
Since their orbits overlap the very meaning of converging and diverging
intervals is different than in the intervals between the major planets.
For example, when is Ceres converging towards Pallas or diverging away
from it? When both are moving away from the Sun, Ceres is getting closer
to Pallas, while, when both are moving closer to the Sun, they become
divergent. Unlike the major planets, however, the point of divergence
and convergence does not occur at the extreme positions. And since the
eccentricities of the asteroids's orbits are changing, where these
orbits cross over from diverging to converging is itself changing. Now,
think of the connectivity involved when thinking of this relationship
among many asteroids, not just two, as in this example!

This braided, overlapping characteristic is not limited to orbits within
the range of the asteroid belt. In fact, the solar system is filled with
orbits that similarly overlap, including asteroids whose orbits overlap
the Earth's. Such overlapping orbits, suggests a new set of harmonic
relationships, akin to the transformation of Bach's well-tempered
polyphony by Beethoven in his late quartets.
:::

::: {.addtoany_share_save_container .addtoany_content_bottom}
::: {.a2a_kit .a2a_kit_size_32 .addtoany_list a2a-url="http://lymcanada.org/15/" a2a-title="Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 15 :  The Solar System’s Harmonic Twist"}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F15%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2015%20%3A%20%20The%20Solar%20System%E2%80%99s%20Harmonic%20Twist "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F15%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2015%20%3A%20%20The%20Solar%20System%E2%80%99s%20Harmonic%20Twist "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/google_plus?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F15%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2015%20%3A%20%20The%20Solar%20System%E2%80%99s%20Harmonic%20Twist "Google+"){.a2a_button_google_plus}
[](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd .addtoany_share_save}
:::
:::
:::

[ [ Posted on ]{.screen-reader-text} [February 20, 2010 February 24,
2019](http://lymcanada.org/15/) ]{.posted-on} [ [ [ Author
]{.screen-reader-text} [Bruce
Director](http://lymcanada.org/author/bdirector/){.url .fn .n} ]{.author
.vcard} ]{.byline} [ [ Categories ]{.screen-reader-text}
[EN](http://lymcanada.org/category/en/) , [Riemmann for
Anti-Dummies](http://lymcanada.org/category/science-1/c132-riemmann-for-anti-dummies/)
]{.cat-links}
