::: entry-header
# Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 17 : Science is not Consensus {#riemann-for-anti-dummies-part-17-science-is-not-consensus .entry-title}
:::

::: entry-content
::: pf-content
## Science is not Concensus

::: {align="justify"}
Over the course of this series we have built up a healthy collection of
examples demonstrating what LaRouche so succinctly expressed at the
Lebedev Institute: "What we call modern physical science, is based on
taking what people believe is the organization of the universe, and
proving it's wrong." This week we add another example to the list.
:::

Between 1818 and 1832, Carl Gauss undertook the primary responsibility
for making a geodetic survey of the Kingdom of Hannover. The task was
exemplary of a great project. Its execution presented major
technological difficulties that could only be overcome by developing new
technologies based on new scientific principles, and its success would
lay the basis for a transformation, through economic development, of the
physical universe. But, perhaps even more important to Gauss, was that
it provided an opportunity for him to, once again, do science, that is,
prove that what everyone was thinking about the universe was wrong.

In the course of his survey, Gauss conducted the following crucial
experiment: He measured the angular height of the pole star over the
horizon from his observatory in Goettingen. His collaborator,
Schumacher, measured the angular height of the pole star from his
observatory in Altona, which was on the same meridian as Goettingen.
From the difference of these angular measurements, Gauss calculated the
distance along the surface of the Earth between the two observatories.

Then, with great effort, Gauss created a triangular grid over the entire
Kingdom of Hannover. From these triangles, he made a second calculation
of the distance along the surface of the Earth between the two
observatories. The difference between the two calculations was 16″ of an
arc. A small error, by Baby Boomer standards, especially when compared
to the Financial Times report yesterday that the "consensus" among
financial experts concerning the prospects for tech stocks in 2001 was
revised from 37% up to 30% down, without blushing. (That's why Baby
Boomers like consensus. Everyone agrees to change their opinion
together, so no one will be embarrassed when the consensus is proven
wrong.)

However, for Gauss, this 16″ of an arc discrepancy, like Kepler's 8′ of
an arc, was the opportunity to demonstrate that the way people were
thinking was wrong. Not, that people were thinking SOMETHING wrong, but
that the WAY they were thinking was wrong. (It is a characteristic of
genius to be able to recognize when such small discrepancies are matters
of principle, and not simply errors.)

What Gauss proved by this 16″ of arc, as did Kepler, Fermat, and Leibniz
previously, was that the mind must be free from any a priori, or "ivory
tower" set of assumptions, such as those axioms, postulates and
definitions of Euclidean geometry. Not, simply free from the particular
axioms, postulates and definitions of Euclid, but free from any a priori
set of assumptions.

Look back over the above described experiment, and discover the
assumptions. First, the angular height of the pole star, is measured
from the horizon. But, what is the horizon? It is not mathematically
determined, but, it is physically determined as the perpendicular to the
pull of gravity, as measured by plane leveller or plumb bob. A horizon
defined in this way, will be tangent to the surface of the Earth at the
point of measurement. Thus, the direction of the pull of gravity, is
itself a function of the shape of the Earth. To calculate the distance
along the surface of the Earth, from this angular change, one has to
make an assumption about what is the shape of the Earth; i.e. if it's a
sphere, the measurement is along a circle, if it's an ellipsoid, the
measurement is along an ellipse. (Draw a circle and an ellipse. Draw
tangents at different places. Draw perpendiculars to the points of
tangency. What direction do these perpendiculars point? On a circle they
all point to the center. On an ellipse they don't.)

Similarly, calculations from the triangular measurements, depend on what
shape the triangles lie. (Compare triangles drawn on a sphere, an
ellipsoid, or some irregular shape, like a watermellon.)

So, could some shape be found, on which the two different methods of
measurement would agree?

Gauss rejected such "curve fitting" methods of thinking and made the
revolutionary discovery that the shape of the Earth is that shape which
is everywhere perpendicular to the pull of gravity, today called the
"Geoid". The Geoid is not a geometrical shape, but rather a physically
determined one. And, such a shape is not only non-uniform, but it is
irregularly non-uniform, even changing over time.

Such an irregular, non-uniform surface, was, as Kepler's orbits, or the
Fermat's path of least-time, or Leibniz' and Bernoulli's catenary,
physically demonstrable, but unrecognizable by the generally accepted
mathematics of the day. Having already been provoked by his teacher,
Abraham Kaestner, Gauss had long before ceased to let mathematics
dictate his thinking. Rather, he, like Leibniz invented a new
mathematics. This extension of Leibniz' calculus did not rely on a
priori assumptions about shape, but was a mathematics of
transformations. Just as Leibniz' calculus made position along a curve a
function of change, Gauss, and later Riemann, made shape a function of
transformations, and curves a function of shape. The change that
determines position along a curve, is itself determined by the
transformation that generated the surface. This new mathematics required
a new type of number; complex numbers. (The next several installments
will work through these concepts in more detail.)

Gauss' method of inventing mathematics is rooted in Cusa's (of whom
Kaestner placed great importance in his "History of Mathematics"). In
"De Ludo Golbi", Cusa writes:

"And the soul invents branches of learning e.g. arithmetic, geometry,
music, and astronomy and it experiences that they are enfolded in its
power; for they are invented, and unfolded, by men....For only in the
rational soul and in its power are the mathematical branches of learning
enfolded; and only by its power are they unfolded. \[This fact is true\]
to such an extent that if the rational soul were not to exist, then
those branches of learning could not at all exist...."

"...the soul's reason, i.e. its distinguishing power, is present in
number, which is from our mind, and in order that you may better know
that that distinguishing power is said to be composed of the same and
different, and of one thing and another thing just as is number, because
number is number by virtue of our mind's distinguishing. And the mind's
numbering is its replicating and repeating the common one, i.e. is its
discerning the one in the many and the many in the one and its
distinguishing one thing from another. Pythagoras, noting that no
knowledge of anything can be had except through distinguishing,
philosophized by means of number, I do not think that anyone else has
attained a more reasonable mode of philosophizing. Because Plato
imitated this mode, he is rightly held to be great."
:::

::: {.addtoany_share_save_container .addtoany_content_bottom}
::: {.a2a_kit .a2a_kit_size_32 .addtoany_list a2a-url="http://lymcanada.org/17/" a2a-title="Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 17 :  Science is not Consensus"}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F17%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2017%20%3A%20%20Science%20is%20not%20Consensus "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F17%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2017%20%3A%20%20Science%20is%20not%20Consensus "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/google_plus?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F17%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2017%20%3A%20%20Science%20is%20not%20Consensus "Google+"){.a2a_button_google_plus}
[](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd .addtoany_share_save}
:::
:::
:::

[ [ Posted on ]{.screen-reader-text} [February 20, 2010 February 24,
2019](http://lymcanada.org/17/) ]{.posted-on} [ [ [ Author
]{.screen-reader-text} [Bruce
Director](http://lymcanada.org/author/bdirector/){.url .fn .n} ]{.author
.vcard} ]{.byline} [ [ Categories ]{.screen-reader-text}
[EN](http://lymcanada.org/category/en/) , [Riemmann for
Anti-Dummies](http://lymcanada.org/category/science-1/c132-riemmann-for-anti-dummies/)
]{.cat-links}

::: entry-header
# Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 17 : Science is not Consensus {#riemann-for-anti-dummies-part-17-science-is-not-consensus-1 .entry-title}
:::

::: entry-content
::: pf-content
## Science is not Concensus

::: {align="justify"}
Over the course of this series we have built up a healthy collection of
examples demonstrating what LaRouche so succinctly expressed at the
Lebedev Institute: "What we call modern physical science, is based on
taking what people believe is the organization of the universe, and
proving it's wrong." This week we add another example to the list.
:::

Between 1818 and 1832, Carl Gauss undertook the primary responsibility
for making a geodetic survey of the Kingdom of Hannover. The task was
exemplary of a great project. Its execution presented major
technological difficulties that could only be overcome by developing new
technologies based on new scientific principles, and its success would
lay the basis for a transformation, through economic development, of the
physical universe. But, perhaps even more important to Gauss, was that
it provided an opportunity for him to, once again, do science, that is,
prove that what everyone was thinking about the universe was wrong.

In the course of his survey, Gauss conducted the following crucial
experiment: He measured the angular height of the pole star over the
horizon from his observatory in Goettingen. His collaborator,
Schumacher, measured the angular height of the pole star from his
observatory in Altona, which was on the same meridian as Goettingen.
From the difference of these angular measurements, Gauss calculated the
distance along the surface of the Earth between the two observatories.

Then, with great effort, Gauss created a triangular grid over the entire
Kingdom of Hannover. From these triangles, he made a second calculation
of the distance along the surface of the Earth between the two
observatories. The difference between the two calculations was 16″ of an
arc. A small error, by Baby Boomer standards, especially when compared
to the Financial Times report yesterday that the "consensus" among
financial experts concerning the prospects for tech stocks in 2001 was
revised from 37% up to 30% down, without blushing. (That's why Baby
Boomers like consensus. Everyone agrees to change their opinion
together, so no one will be embarrassed when the consensus is proven
wrong.)

However, for Gauss, this 16″ of an arc discrepancy, like Kepler's 8′ of
an arc, was the opportunity to demonstrate that the way people were
thinking was wrong. Not, that people were thinking SOMETHING wrong, but
that the WAY they were thinking was wrong. (It is a characteristic of
genius to be able to recognize when such small discrepancies are matters
of principle, and not simply errors.)

What Gauss proved by this 16″ of arc, as did Kepler, Fermat, and Leibniz
previously, was that the mind must be free from any a priori, or "ivory
tower" set of assumptions, such as those axioms, postulates and
definitions of Euclidean geometry. Not, simply free from the particular
axioms, postulates and definitions of Euclid, but free from any a priori
set of assumptions.

Look back over the above described experiment, and discover the
assumptions. First, the angular height of the pole star, is measured
from the horizon. But, what is the horizon? It is not mathematically
determined, but, it is physically determined as the perpendicular to the
pull of gravity, as measured by plane leveller or plumb bob. A horizon
defined in this way, will be tangent to the surface of the Earth at the
point of measurement. Thus, the direction of the pull of gravity, is
itself a function of the shape of the Earth. To calculate the distance
along the surface of the Earth, from this angular change, one has to
make an assumption about what is the shape of the Earth; i.e. if it's a
sphere, the measurement is along a circle, if it's an ellipsoid, the
measurement is along an ellipse. (Draw a circle and an ellipse. Draw
tangents at different places. Draw perpendiculars to the points of
tangency. What direction do these perpendiculars point? On a circle they
all point to the center. On an ellipse they don't.)

Similarly, calculations from the triangular measurements, depend on what
shape the triangles lie. (Compare triangles drawn on a sphere, an
ellipsoid, or some irregular shape, like a watermellon.)

So, could some shape be found, on which the two different methods of
measurement would agree?

Gauss rejected such "curve fitting" methods of thinking and made the
revolutionary discovery that the shape of the Earth is that shape which
is everywhere perpendicular to the pull of gravity, today called the
"Geoid". The Geoid is not a geometrical shape, but rather a physically
determined one. And, such a shape is not only non-uniform, but it is
irregularly non-uniform, even changing over time.

Such an irregular, non-uniform surface, was, as Kepler's orbits, or the
Fermat's path of least-time, or Leibniz' and Bernoulli's catenary,
physically demonstrable, but unrecognizable by the generally accepted
mathematics of the day. Having already been provoked by his teacher,
Abraham Kaestner, Gauss had long before ceased to let mathematics
dictate his thinking. Rather, he, like Leibniz invented a new
mathematics. This extension of Leibniz' calculus did not rely on a
priori assumptions about shape, but was a mathematics of
transformations. Just as Leibniz' calculus made position along a curve a
function of change, Gauss, and later Riemann, made shape a function of
transformations, and curves a function of shape. The change that
determines position along a curve, is itself determined by the
transformation that generated the surface. This new mathematics required
a new type of number; complex numbers. (The next several installments
will work through these concepts in more detail.)

Gauss' method of inventing mathematics is rooted in Cusa's (of whom
Kaestner placed great importance in his "History of Mathematics"). In
"De Ludo Golbi", Cusa writes:

"And the soul invents branches of learning e.g. arithmetic, geometry,
music, and astronomy and it experiences that they are enfolded in its
power; for they are invented, and unfolded, by men....For only in the
rational soul and in its power are the mathematical branches of learning
enfolded; and only by its power are they unfolded. \[This fact is true\]
to such an extent that if the rational soul were not to exist, then
those branches of learning could not at all exist...."

"...the soul's reason, i.e. its distinguishing power, is present in
number, which is from our mind, and in order that you may better know
that that distinguishing power is said to be composed of the same and
different, and of one thing and another thing just as is number, because
number is number by virtue of our mind's distinguishing. And the mind's
numbering is its replicating and repeating the common one, i.e. is its
discerning the one in the many and the many in the one and its
distinguishing one thing from another. Pythagoras, noting that no
knowledge of anything can be had except through distinguishing,
philosophized by means of number, I do not think that anyone else has
attained a more reasonable mode of philosophizing. Because Plato
imitated this mode, he is rightly held to be great."
:::

::: {.addtoany_share_save_container .addtoany_content_bottom}
::: {.a2a_kit .a2a_kit_size_32 .addtoany_list a2a-url="http://lymcanada.org/17/" a2a-title="Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 17 :  Science is not Consensus"}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F17%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2017%20%3A%20%20Science%20is%20not%20Consensus "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F17%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2017%20%3A%20%20Science%20is%20not%20Consensus "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/google_plus?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F17%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2017%20%3A%20%20Science%20is%20not%20Consensus "Google+"){.a2a_button_google_plus}
[](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd .addtoany_share_save}
:::
:::
:::

[ [ Posted on ]{.screen-reader-text} [February 20, 2010 February 24,
2019](http://lymcanada.org/17/) ]{.posted-on} [ [ [ Author
]{.screen-reader-text} [Bruce
Director](http://lymcanada.org/author/bdirector/){.url .fn .n} ]{.author
.vcard} ]{.byline} [ [ Categories ]{.screen-reader-text}
[EN](http://lymcanada.org/category/en/) , [Riemmann for
Anti-Dummies](http://lymcanada.org/category/science-1/c132-riemmann-for-anti-dummies/)
]{.cat-links}
