::: entry-header
# Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 21 : It is Principles, Not Numbers that Count {#riemann-for-anti-dummies-part-21-it-is-principles-not-numbers-that-count .entry-title}
:::

::: entry-content
::: pf-content
## It is Principles, Not Numbers, That Count {#it-is-principles-not-numbers-that-count style="text-align: left;"}

As we continue the investigations into the "hints" from Gauss, to which
Riemann referred in his 1854 habilitation lecture, it is vitally
important to maintain the perspective of a member of the audience in the
lecture hall that June day when Riemann delivered his revolutionary
address. Don't be a fearful, passive observer. Go in. Take the open seat
next to the 77 year old Gauss and hear these living ideas, not only as
they were spoken then, but as they are today, alive and transformed in
the mind and work of LaRouche, for which Riemann provides brief hints.

Listen as Riemann boldly proposes "to lift the darkness" that has
existed for more than 2000 years, by elaborating a "general concept of
multiply-extended magnitude". But, before you can even begin to lift
that darkness, you must first realize that the lights aren't on.

That is the basis on which the preliminary exercises into the
investigations of the geometry of numbers was begun last week.

Gauss is training the mind to give up all deductive, a priori, notions
of number. Instead of investigating numbers, we investigate what
generates them. It is the principle of generation to which we must turn
our thoughts, aided by concepts from Classical art. The numbers are
simply players, guides to what's in between.

The first principle of generation of numbers, to which Gauss points, is
the generation of numbers by the juxtaposition of three cycles. While
this concept was introduced in a new form in the Disquisitiones
Arithmeticae, by the concept of congruence with respect to a modulus,
the principle underlying it is perhaps the earliest, and most elementary
concept of number. In this case, no number exists on its own. Rather,
all numbers exist as players, whose parts are a function of their
relationship to one another and a One, which Gauss called a modulus.
Thus, all numbers are ordered according to the characteristics of the
modulus. Those characteristics are themselves determined by an
underlying generating principle, which will become more clear below. The
so-called, "natural", counting numbers are only the special case, of
numbers ordered with respect to the modulus 1.

The second principle of generation to which Gauss turned his attention,
is generating numbers from a cycle of cycles, specifically, the
"geometric" cycle. Here each cycle is generated by the function
described by Plato in the Theatetus dialogue, as reflected in the
alternating series of squares and rectangles produced by some repeated
action, such as doubling or tripling, etc. However, Gauss, as Plato,
Kepler, Leibniz, Bernoulli and Fermat before him, understood that the
alternating series of squares and rectangles, was itself only a shadow
of a higher principle of generation, that had to be discovered.

Naive sense certainty says this geometric progression is not a cycle at
all, but open ended and continuously growing. Yet, as the experiments at
the end of last week's installment illustrate, if each "stage" of the
geometric progression is thought of as a cycle, and each such cycle is
juxtaposed to a third cycle (modulus), an underlying periodicity is
revealed, indicating the characteristics of the cycle that generated
each stage.

The principle of generation of that underlying cycle, is best
investigated by experiment. Hopefully, you carried out the experiment
indicated last week. If so, you will have no trouble producing the
necessary geometric constructions.

Construct a chart of the residues of powers with respect to modulus 11
by first making a row of numbers from 0 to 10. These denote the powers.
Then make a separate row of the residues of the powers of 2 through 10,
writing each residue under the corresponding power. The result should be
the following:

        Powers: 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,10 
         2: 1, 2, 4, 8. 5, 10,9, 7, 3, 6, 1 
         3: 1, 3, 9, 3, 4, 1, 3, 9, 5, 4, 1 
         4: 1, 4, 5, 9, 3, 1, 4, 5, 9, 3, 1 
         5: 1, 5, 3, 4, 9, 1, 5, 3, 4, 9, 1 
         6: 1, 6, 3, 7, 9, 10,5, 8, 4, 2, 1 
         7: 1, 7, 5, 2, 3, 10,4, 6, 9, 8, 1 
         8: 1, 8, 9, 6, 4, 10,3, 2, 5, 7, 1 
         9: 1, 9, 4, 3, 5, 1, 9, 4, 3, 5, 1 
        10: 1,10, 1, 10,1, 10,1, 10,1,10, 1
       

Now have some fun. Obviously, this action produces, from the open and
growing geometric cycle, a regular structured periodicity. The question
Fermat, Leibniz, and Gauss investigated was, "What generating principle
produces this?" To begin to answer this, they looked for the paradoxes,
within the seemingly regular structure.

First, it is clear that each period begins and ends with 1 and there are
three types of periods. Those periods, such as for the powers of 2, 6,
7, and 8, that are 10 numbers long and include all the numbers between 1
and 10. Gauss called these numbers, 2,6,7 and 8 "primitive roots" of 11.
The second type of period, for the powers of 3, 4, 5, and 9 are 5
numbers long. The third type of period is the powers of 10 which is only
2 numbers long. Thus, the residues of powers with respect to modulus 11
permits only certain size "orbits" so to speak, which are restricted to
the size of 10 and the prime number factors of 10, that is, 2 and 5.

Now, even though each period puts the numbers in a different order, this
order is highly determined. To see this, hunt through the whole chart
and circle the primitive roots, 2, 6, 7, and 8, wherever they appear.
You should discover that these numbers do not appear as residues, except
in the periods that are 10 numbers long. Also, even though they appear
in different places in each period, they always are residues of the
powers 1, 3, 7, or 9, which are the numbers that are relatively prime to
10.

This begins to reveal the nature of the underlying generating principle
of these "orbits", as the characteristics of the number 10, specifically
its prime factors and its relative primes, determine the ordering of the
periods!

Keeping this in your mind's eye, draw an alternating series of squares
and rectangles, first by doubling, then by tripling, and label each
according to the residue from the powers of 2 and 3 respectively to
which it corresponds. This will reveal that the even powers correspond
to squares and the odd powers correspond to rectangles. Notice how the
residue 1 only appears on a square and the residue 10 only appears on a
rectangle. Also, the squares always correspond to even numbered powers,
while the rectangles correspond to odd numbered powers.

Thus, the quality of odd and even, reflect a geometric characteristic,
not a numerical property of numbers. For these geometrical reasons,
Gauss called the residues of the even powers, "quadratic residues" and
the residues of the odd powers, "quadratic non-residues". Gauss paid
special attention to this characteristic, for its investigation opened
the door to some of the most profound principles. In the next
installment we will explore this more fully.

But, before closing, look at one more anomaly. Notice that the residue
at the halfway point, that is the residue of the power 5, is always 1 or
10. Since 10 is congruent to -1, the residue of the middle power is
always 1 or -1. While 5 is the arithmetic mean between 0 and 10, its
residue, 1 or -1 is the geometric mean between 1 and 1! In other words,
1 and 10 are the square roots of 1 relative to modulus 11.

Look back over the preceding investigations from the perspective of a
classical drama. Think of the foregoing as a drama of 10 characters.
Each character has several roles, in which they wear the same costume,
but do different things. The playwright has deliberately chosen this
device so that the audience can be broken from judging these characters
by naive sense-certainty. This helps convey an idea that could not be
expressed in words by any of the characters, but only by the totality of
all their actions taken as a whole, and the ironies revealed when the
same actor does something completely different, without changing his
costume. Each number from 1 to 10 has a different function, whether it's
a power, a residue, or a base. In some roles, the obvious
characteristics of the number, such as odd or even, factor or relative
prime, seem to affect its function, but in other cases, such as the
primitive roots, these obvious characteristics seem to have no bearing.
Only when all the roles are played out can we begin to taste the
intention of the playwright.

Gauss could see that these anomalies could not be derived from a concept
of number, in the naive sense of an object that counts things, but,
rather, these anomalies revealed an underlying {geometric} generating
principle, that shone through the numbers themselves. But, to bring out
that light, required a complete revolution in the way people thought
about number. As he said in the beginning of the first Treatise on
Bi-quadratic Residues, "we soon came to the knowledge, that the
customary principles of arithmetic, are in no way sufficient for the
foundation of a general theory, and that it is very much necessary, that
the region of higher arithmetic be, so to speak, infinitely much more
extended."
:::

::: {.addtoany_share_save_container .addtoany_content_bottom}
::: {.a2a_kit .a2a_kit_size_32 .addtoany_list a2a-url="http://lymcanada.org/21/" a2a-title="Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part  21 :  It is Principles, Not Numbers that Count"}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F21%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%20%2021%20%3A%20%20It%20is%20Principles%2C%20Not%20Numbers%20that%20Count "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F21%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%20%2021%20%3A%20%20It%20is%20Principles%2C%20Not%20Numbers%20that%20Count "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/google_plus?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F21%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%20%2021%20%3A%20%20It%20is%20Principles%2C%20Not%20Numbers%20that%20Count "Google+"){.a2a_button_google_plus}
[](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd .addtoany_share_save}
:::
:::
:::

[ [ Posted on ]{.screen-reader-text} [February 20, 2010 February 24,
2019](http://lymcanada.org/21/) ]{.posted-on} [ [ [ Author
]{.screen-reader-text} [Bruce
Director](http://lymcanada.org/author/bdirector/){.url .fn .n} ]{.author
.vcard} ]{.byline} [ [ Categories ]{.screen-reader-text}
[EN](http://lymcanada.org/category/en/) , [Riemmann for
Anti-Dummies](http://lymcanada.org/category/science-1/c132-riemmann-for-anti-dummies/)
]{.cat-links}

::: entry-header
# Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 21 : It is Principles, Not Numbers that Count {#riemann-for-anti-dummies-part-21-it-is-principles-not-numbers-that-count-1 .entry-title}
:::

::: entry-content
::: pf-content
## It is Principles, Not Numbers, That Count {#it-is-principles-not-numbers-that-count-1 style="text-align: left;"}

As we continue the investigations into the "hints" from Gauss, to which
Riemann referred in his 1854 habilitation lecture, it is vitally
important to maintain the perspective of a member of the audience in the
lecture hall that June day when Riemann delivered his revolutionary
address. Don't be a fearful, passive observer. Go in. Take the open seat
next to the 77 year old Gauss and hear these living ideas, not only as
they were spoken then, but as they are today, alive and transformed in
the mind and work of LaRouche, for which Riemann provides brief hints.

Listen as Riemann boldly proposes "to lift the darkness" that has
existed for more than 2000 years, by elaborating a "general concept of
multiply-extended magnitude". But, before you can even begin to lift
that darkness, you must first realize that the lights aren't on.

That is the basis on which the preliminary exercises into the
investigations of the geometry of numbers was begun last week.

Gauss is training the mind to give up all deductive, a priori, notions
of number. Instead of investigating numbers, we investigate what
generates them. It is the principle of generation to which we must turn
our thoughts, aided by concepts from Classical art. The numbers are
simply players, guides to what's in between.

The first principle of generation of numbers, to which Gauss points, is
the generation of numbers by the juxtaposition of three cycles. While
this concept was introduced in a new form in the Disquisitiones
Arithmeticae, by the concept of congruence with respect to a modulus,
the principle underlying it is perhaps the earliest, and most elementary
concept of number. In this case, no number exists on its own. Rather,
all numbers exist as players, whose parts are a function of their
relationship to one another and a One, which Gauss called a modulus.
Thus, all numbers are ordered according to the characteristics of the
modulus. Those characteristics are themselves determined by an
underlying generating principle, which will become more clear below. The
so-called, "natural", counting numbers are only the special case, of
numbers ordered with respect to the modulus 1.

The second principle of generation to which Gauss turned his attention,
is generating numbers from a cycle of cycles, specifically, the
"geometric" cycle. Here each cycle is generated by the function
described by Plato in the Theatetus dialogue, as reflected in the
alternating series of squares and rectangles produced by some repeated
action, such as doubling or tripling, etc. However, Gauss, as Plato,
Kepler, Leibniz, Bernoulli and Fermat before him, understood that the
alternating series of squares and rectangles, was itself only a shadow
of a higher principle of generation, that had to be discovered.

Naive sense certainty says this geometric progression is not a cycle at
all, but open ended and continuously growing. Yet, as the experiments at
the end of last week's installment illustrate, if each "stage" of the
geometric progression is thought of as a cycle, and each such cycle is
juxtaposed to a third cycle (modulus), an underlying periodicity is
revealed, indicating the characteristics of the cycle that generated
each stage.

The principle of generation of that underlying cycle, is best
investigated by experiment. Hopefully, you carried out the experiment
indicated last week. If so, you will have no trouble producing the
necessary geometric constructions.

Construct a chart of the residues of powers with respect to modulus 11
by first making a row of numbers from 0 to 10. These denote the powers.
Then make a separate row of the residues of the powers of 2 through 10,
writing each residue under the corresponding power. The result should be
the following:

        Powers: 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,10 
         2: 1, 2, 4, 8. 5, 10,9, 7, 3, 6, 1 
         3: 1, 3, 9, 3, 4, 1, 3, 9, 5, 4, 1 
         4: 1, 4, 5, 9, 3, 1, 4, 5, 9, 3, 1 
         5: 1, 5, 3, 4, 9, 1, 5, 3, 4, 9, 1 
         6: 1, 6, 3, 7, 9, 10,5, 8, 4, 2, 1 
         7: 1, 7, 5, 2, 3, 10,4, 6, 9, 8, 1 
         8: 1, 8, 9, 6, 4, 10,3, 2, 5, 7, 1 
         9: 1, 9, 4, 3, 5, 1, 9, 4, 3, 5, 1 
        10: 1,10, 1, 10,1, 10,1, 10,1,10, 1
       

Now have some fun. Obviously, this action produces, from the open and
growing geometric cycle, a regular structured periodicity. The question
Fermat, Leibniz, and Gauss investigated was, "What generating principle
produces this?" To begin to answer this, they looked for the paradoxes,
within the seemingly regular structure.

First, it is clear that each period begins and ends with 1 and there are
three types of periods. Those periods, such as for the powers of 2, 6,
7, and 8, that are 10 numbers long and include all the numbers between 1
and 10. Gauss called these numbers, 2,6,7 and 8 "primitive roots" of 11.
The second type of period, for the powers of 3, 4, 5, and 9 are 5
numbers long. The third type of period is the powers of 10 which is only
2 numbers long. Thus, the residues of powers with respect to modulus 11
permits only certain size "orbits" so to speak, which are restricted to
the size of 10 and the prime number factors of 10, that is, 2 and 5.

Now, even though each period puts the numbers in a different order, this
order is highly determined. To see this, hunt through the whole chart
and circle the primitive roots, 2, 6, 7, and 8, wherever they appear.
You should discover that these numbers do not appear as residues, except
in the periods that are 10 numbers long. Also, even though they appear
in different places in each period, they always are residues of the
powers 1, 3, 7, or 9, which are the numbers that are relatively prime to
10.

This begins to reveal the nature of the underlying generating principle
of these "orbits", as the characteristics of the number 10, specifically
its prime factors and its relative primes, determine the ordering of the
periods!

Keeping this in your mind's eye, draw an alternating series of squares
and rectangles, first by doubling, then by tripling, and label each
according to the residue from the powers of 2 and 3 respectively to
which it corresponds. This will reveal that the even powers correspond
to squares and the odd powers correspond to rectangles. Notice how the
residue 1 only appears on a square and the residue 10 only appears on a
rectangle. Also, the squares always correspond to even numbered powers,
while the rectangles correspond to odd numbered powers.

Thus, the quality of odd and even, reflect a geometric characteristic,
not a numerical property of numbers. For these geometrical reasons,
Gauss called the residues of the even powers, "quadratic residues" and
the residues of the odd powers, "quadratic non-residues". Gauss paid
special attention to this characteristic, for its investigation opened
the door to some of the most profound principles. In the next
installment we will explore this more fully.

But, before closing, look at one more anomaly. Notice that the residue
at the halfway point, that is the residue of the power 5, is always 1 or
10. Since 10 is congruent to -1, the residue of the middle power is
always 1 or -1. While 5 is the arithmetic mean between 0 and 10, its
residue, 1 or -1 is the geometric mean between 1 and 1! In other words,
1 and 10 are the square roots of 1 relative to modulus 11.

Look back over the preceding investigations from the perspective of a
classical drama. Think of the foregoing as a drama of 10 characters.
Each character has several roles, in which they wear the same costume,
but do different things. The playwright has deliberately chosen this
device so that the audience can be broken from judging these characters
by naive sense-certainty. This helps convey an idea that could not be
expressed in words by any of the characters, but only by the totality of
all their actions taken as a whole, and the ironies revealed when the
same actor does something completely different, without changing his
costume. Each number from 1 to 10 has a different function, whether it's
a power, a residue, or a base. In some roles, the obvious
characteristics of the number, such as odd or even, factor or relative
prime, seem to affect its function, but in other cases, such as the
primitive roots, these obvious characteristics seem to have no bearing.
Only when all the roles are played out can we begin to taste the
intention of the playwright.

Gauss could see that these anomalies could not be derived from a concept
of number, in the naive sense of an object that counts things, but,
rather, these anomalies revealed an underlying {geometric} generating
principle, that shone through the numbers themselves. But, to bring out
that light, required a complete revolution in the way people thought
about number. As he said in the beginning of the first Treatise on
Bi-quadratic Residues, "we soon came to the knowledge, that the
customary principles of arithmetic, are in no way sufficient for the
foundation of a general theory, and that it is very much necessary, that
the region of higher arithmetic be, so to speak, infinitely much more
extended."
:::

::: {.addtoany_share_save_container .addtoany_content_bottom}
::: {.a2a_kit .a2a_kit_size_32 .addtoany_list a2a-url="http://lymcanada.org/21/" a2a-title="Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part  21 :  It is Principles, Not Numbers that Count"}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F21%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%20%2021%20%3A%20%20It%20is%20Principles%2C%20Not%20Numbers%20that%20Count "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F21%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%20%2021%20%3A%20%20It%20is%20Principles%2C%20Not%20Numbers%20that%20Count "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/google_plus?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F21%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%20%2021%20%3A%20%20It%20is%20Principles%2C%20Not%20Numbers%20that%20Count "Google+"){.a2a_button_google_plus}
[](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd .addtoany_share_save}
:::
:::
:::

[ [ Posted on ]{.screen-reader-text} [February 20, 2010 February 24,
2019](http://lymcanada.org/21/) ]{.posted-on} [ [ [ Author
]{.screen-reader-text} [Bruce
Director](http://lymcanada.org/author/bdirector/){.url .fn .n} ]{.author
.vcard} ]{.byline} [ [ Categories ]{.screen-reader-text}
[EN](http://lymcanada.org/category/en/) , [Riemmann for
Anti-Dummies](http://lymcanada.org/category/science-1/c132-riemmann-for-anti-dummies/)
]{.cat-links}
