::: entry-header
# Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 24 : Let There Be Light {#riemann-for-anti-dummies-part-24-let-there-be-light .entry-title}
:::

::: entry-content
::: pf-content
**Riemann for Anti-Dummies Part 24**

LET THERE BE LIGHT

As you heard Riemann proclaim in the opening remarks of his Habilitation
lecture, without a "general concept of multiply-extended magnitudes in
which spatial magnitudes are comprehended," you are left in the dark.
You can not know the nature of the physical universe, the validity of an
idea, the economic value of human activity, the strategic significance
of a current, or historical, event, or your personal identity in the
simultaneity of eternity, to name but a few of the more important
matters on which one would wish to shed light. Yet, the principles to
which Riemann refers are far too little understood by those who must
urgently be able to make such judgements.

Referencing Gauss, Riemann cites two characteristics necessary for the
determination of multiply-extended magnitudes, dimensionality and
curvature, neither of which can be determined a priori, but only by
physical measurement. Such magnitudes are not mathematical quantities,
but are universal physical principles, produced by a manifold of
physical action, and, are relative to the manifold, not absolute.

Take some examples from the arsenal of ideas built up over the course of
this series to illustrate the point.

1\. As Kepler demonstrated, the non-uniform elliptical planetary orbit
defines the magnitude of action within an orbit, as equal areas, rather
than the arbitrary mathematical magnitudes of equal arcs or equal
angles. The solar system as a whole, in turn defines a magnitude of
action for individual orbits, consistent with the five Platonic solids,
and the principles of musical polyphony. Thus, the action of a planet at
any moment can only be measured as a function of the whole orbit, which
orbit in turn is measured as a function of the whole solar system. While
the orbit defines one species of magnitude (equal areas) the solar
system as a whole defines a distinct and different species of magnitude
(harmonics), which "reach down" into all parts of the individual orbit,
even though the latter cannot be derived simply from the former.

2\. The shortest path of reflected light defines a magnitude of action
measured by equal angles. The least time path of refracted light defines
a magnitude of action measured by the proportionality of the sines of
the angles of incidence and refraction. In other words, under reflection
the angles measure the change in the direction of the light, while under
refraction, the angles are determined by the sines. In the manifold of
physical action of reflected light, there is no change in medium,
consequently no change in velocity of light, and so the effect of the
sines "disappears" into the equality of angles. But in the higher
dimensional manifold of refraction, the truth comes out, that it is not
the angles that measure the action, but the inverse, the transcendental
magnitudes of the sines.

It is important to keep in mind, that in both these examples,
"dimension" is not a mathematical construct, but is associated with a
distinct physical principle, which is then associated with a distinct
species of magnitude, and, as Riemann emphasizes, the number of
dimensions is increased by the discovery of each new physical
principles.

This concept of magnitude is consistent with Schiller's expression in
"On the Aesthetic Estimation of Magnitude":

"All comparative estimation of magnitude, however, be it abstract or
physical, be it wholly or only partly determined, leads only to
relative, and never to absolute magnitude; for if an object actually
exceeds the measure which we assume to be a maximum, it can still always
be asked, by how many times the measure is exceeded. It is certainly a
large thing in relation to its species, but yet not the largest
possible, and once the constraint is exceeded, it can be exceeded again
and again, into infinity. Now, however, we are seeking absolute
magnitude, for this alone can contain in itself the basis of a higher
order, since all relative magnitudes, as such, are like to one another.
Since nothing can compel our mind to halt its business, it must be the
mind's power of imagination which sets a limit for that activity. In
other words, the estimation of magnitude must cease to be logical, it
must be achieved aesthetically.

"If I estimate a magnitude in a logical fashion, I always relate it to
my cognitive faculty; if I estimate it aesthetically, I relate it to my
faculty of sensibility. In the first case, I experience something about
the object, in the second case, on the contrary. I only experience
something within me, caused by the imagined magnitude of the object. In
the first case I behold something outside myself, in the second,
something within me. Thus, in reality, I am no longer measuring, I am no
longer estimating magnitude, rather I myself become for the moment a
magnitude to myself, and indeed an infinite one. That object which
causes me to be an infinite magnitude to myself, is called sublime."

Think in these terms about Gauss' development of the complex domain in
the context of his work on biquadratic residues, where Gauss
demonstrates that it is actually impossible to construct a concept of
magnitude devoid of dimensionality. As the discoveries that Plato made
famous in his Meno, Theatetus, and Timaeus dialogues, action along a
line, a surface, or a solid, is associated, in each case, with distinct
species of magnitude. The species of magnitude, associated with the
manifolds of lower dimensions, are found in the manifolds of higher
dimensions but not vice versa. Consequently, a paradox arises, if one
attempts to measure action in manifolds of higher dimensions, by
magnitudes that are produced in a manifold of lower dimensionality.

Look at this from the standpoint of the simple operations with numbers,
addition, subtraction, multiplication, division. (Riemann added Leibniz'
integration and differentiation, to the domain of simple operations, and
this will be taken up in future installments.) As the Theatetus reports,
addition of doubly-extended magnitudes, (i.e. areas) cannot be measured
by simply-extended magnitudes (i.e. lines), and yet, until Gauss, all
operations of Arithmetic were constrained by the underlying assumption
that each manifold could be measured by the same species of magnitudes.
This paradox reemerged from the Renaissance on, as the paradox
associated with the ?-1. Cardan, Leibniz, Huygens, and Kaestner, all
understood that this paradox required the need for a higher conception
of magnitude, while Newton, Euler and others, dismissed this magnitude
as "impossible" .

For Gauss, action in a doubly-extended manifold, could only be measured
by doubly- extended magnitudes, which he called "complex numbers". These
numbers are determined by two actions, rotation and extension, or
alternatively, simultaneous horizontal and vertical action, such as in
the bubble of a carpenters level. (It is about time to replace the
commonly used term "Cartesian coordinates" when referring to horizontal
and vertical action, with the more historically and conceptually
accurate, term, "Fermat coordinates".)

From this standpoint look at the basic concepts of Arithmetic with
respect to both simply- extended and doubly-extended magnitudes. Under
Gauss' concept of congruence, all numbers are ordered with respect to
the interval between them or the modulus. With respect to simply-
extended manifolds, that interval corresponds to a line segment. But,
with respect to a doubly- extended manifold, that interval has two
parts, up-down and back forth. Illustrate this with an example from
Gauss' second treatise on bi-quadratic residues. The modulus 5+2 *i*
"partitions" the entire complex domain, by a series of squares whose
sides are the hypothenuses of right triangles whose legs are 5 and 2.
For example, the square whose vertices are 0, 5+2 *i* , 3+7 *i* , -- 2+5
*i* . All complex numbers inside this square are not congruent to each
other. Now draw adjacent squares, such as the squares whose vertices are
5+2 *i* , 10+4 *i* , 8+9 *i* , 3+7 *i* ; or, 3+7 *i* , 8+9 *i* , 6+14
*i* , 1+12 *i* . All the numbers inside these squares are also not
congruent to each other, but each number is congruent to the one number
in each of the other squares, which is in the same relative position
within the square. For example, 2+4 *i* and 7+6 *i* , occupy the same
relative position within their respective squares, consequently, the
difference (interval) between them is the modulus 5+2 *i* .

Thus, the simple periodicity generated by congruences with respect to
real numbers, is transformed into a double periodicity with respect to
complex moduli. In a simply-extended manifold, therefore, subtraction
determines the linear interval between two numbers, while in a
doubly-extended manifold, subtraction determines the area interval
between two numbers.

Gauss next developed a concept of doubly-extended "complex"
multiplication, which will require you to re-think what you were taught
about multiplying numbers in elementary school. Simply-extended
multiplication was defined by Euclid as:

"15. A number is said to multiply a number when that which is multiplied
is added to itself as many times as there are units in the other, and
thus some number is produced."

But, even Euclid admits an inadequacy of this concept in the next
definition:

"16. And, when two numbers having multiplied one another make some
number, the number so produced is called plane, and its sides are the
numbers which have multiplied one another."

But, we already have discovered from Theatetus, that adding in a
simply-extended manifold, (lines) and adding in a doubly-extended
manifold (areas) are not the same, so how can adding one number to
itself "as many times as there are units in the other" (definition 15.)
produce the areas described in definition 16? This darkness arises from
the lack of a concept of multiply-extended magnitude.

The matter is resolved by a higher concept. If you look again at
Theatetus' alternating series of squares and rectangles, or the
expanding series of squares from the Meno, you can see that adding areas
produces a rotation and an extension. For example, the square whose area
is 1 is transformed into the rectangle whose area is two, by rotating a
line whose length is 1 90 degrees and multiplying its length by 2. The
next transformation, to a square whose area is 4, is produced by the
action of rotating the longer side of the rectangle and additional 90
degrees, and multiplying its length again by 2.

As Gauss' follower Neils Henrick Abel said, "To know the truth, you must
always invert." An inversion, therefore, will show us the general
principle that is, the action of adding rotation and multiplying
lengths, produces the geometric progression.

So in the complex domain, multiplication is the action of adding
rotations and multiplying lengths.

Illustrate this first with respect to prime numbers, by the example of
multiplying (1+2 *i* )(1-2 *i* ). 1+2 *i* denotes a rotation of 45
degrees and a linear extension of ?5. 1-2 *i* denotes a rotation of 45
degrees, in the opposite direction and a linear extension of ?5. To
multiply the two magnitudes, add the rotations, (which together equal 0)
and multiply the extensions (?5)(?5) = 5. Hence, 5, a prime number in a
simply-extended manifold, is a composite number in a doubly- extended
manifold. However, no such geometric action will produce odd-odd prime
numbers such as 7, 11, 19, etc.

Gauss saw this paradox as an excellent pedagogical demonstration of the
principle that the nature of the manifold determines nature of the
magnitudes. Since prime numbers produce all numbers by multiplication,
but cannot be produced themselves by multiplication, Gauss has shown
that these magnitudes, (prime numbers) that produce other magnitudes
(composite numbers) are themselves produced by the manifold in which the
action (multiplication) takes place . Some numbers are prime (undeniable
facts) but when a new principle (dimension) is added even those
undeniable facts, are changed!

Now, construct a geometric progression from a complex number, by
multiplying that number by itself repeatedly. For example, start with 1+
*i* which denotes a rotation of 45 degrees and an extension of ?2. Then
multiply 1+ *i* times 1+ *i* . This produces a rotation of 90 degrees
and an extension of 2. Repeating this again produces a rotation of 135
degrees and an extension of 4. If you continue this action you will see
unfolding points on a logarithmic spiral.

From this Gauss demonstrated that the periodicity produced by the
residues of a geometric progression, actually reflected magnitudes of a
higher manifold. In the next installment, we will illustrate this
discovery.
:::

::: {.addtoany_share_save_container .addtoany_content_bottom}
::: {.a2a_kit .a2a_kit_size_32 .addtoany_list a2a-url="http://lymcanada.org/24/" a2a-title="Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part  24 :  Let There Be Light"}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F24%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%20%2024%20%3A%20%20Let%20There%20Be%20Light "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F24%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%20%2024%20%3A%20%20Let%20There%20Be%20Light "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/google_plus?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F24%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%20%2024%20%3A%20%20Let%20There%20Be%20Light "Google+"){.a2a_button_google_plus}
[](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd .addtoany_share_save}
:::
:::
:::

[ [ Posted on ]{.screen-reader-text} [February 20, 2010 December 30,
2014](http://lymcanada.org/24/) ]{.posted-on} [ [ [ Author
]{.screen-reader-text} [Bruce
Director](http://lymcanada.org/author/bdirector/){.url .fn .n} ]{.author
.vcard} ]{.byline} [ [ Categories ]{.screen-reader-text}
[EN](http://lymcanada.org/category/en/) , [Riemann for
Anti-Dummies](http://lymcanada.org/category/science-1/c132-riemann-for-anti-dummies/)
]{.cat-links}

::: entry-header
# Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 24 : Let There Be Light {#riemann-for-anti-dummies-part-24-let-there-be-light-1 .entry-title}
:::

::: entry-content
::: pf-content
**Riemann for Anti-Dummies Part 24**

LET THERE BE LIGHT

As you heard Riemann proclaim in the opening remarks of his Habilitation
lecture, without a "general concept of multiply-extended magnitudes in
which spatial magnitudes are comprehended," you are left in the dark.
You can not know the nature of the physical universe, the validity of an
idea, the economic value of human activity, the strategic significance
of a current, or historical, event, or your personal identity in the
simultaneity of eternity, to name but a few of the more important
matters on which one would wish to shed light. Yet, the principles to
which Riemann refers are far too little understood by those who must
urgently be able to make such judgements.

Referencing Gauss, Riemann cites two characteristics necessary for the
determination of multiply-extended magnitudes, dimensionality and
curvature, neither of which can be determined a priori, but only by
physical measurement. Such magnitudes are not mathematical quantities,
but are universal physical principles, produced by a manifold of
physical action, and, are relative to the manifold, not absolute.

Take some examples from the arsenal of ideas built up over the course of
this series to illustrate the point.

1\. As Kepler demonstrated, the non-uniform elliptical planetary orbit
defines the magnitude of action within an orbit, as equal areas, rather
than the arbitrary mathematical magnitudes of equal arcs or equal
angles. The solar system as a whole, in turn defines a magnitude of
action for individual orbits, consistent with the five Platonic solids,
and the principles of musical polyphony. Thus, the action of a planet at
any moment can only be measured as a function of the whole orbit, which
orbit in turn is measured as a function of the whole solar system. While
the orbit defines one species of magnitude (equal areas) the solar
system as a whole defines a distinct and different species of magnitude
(harmonics), which "reach down" into all parts of the individual orbit,
even though the latter cannot be derived simply from the former.

2\. The shortest path of reflected light defines a magnitude of action
measured by equal angles. The least time path of refracted light defines
a magnitude of action measured by the proportionality of the sines of
the angles of incidence and refraction. In other words, under reflection
the angles measure the change in the direction of the light, while under
refraction, the angles are determined by the sines. In the manifold of
physical action of reflected light, there is no change in medium,
consequently no change in velocity of light, and so the effect of the
sines "disappears" into the equality of angles. But in the higher
dimensional manifold of refraction, the truth comes out, that it is not
the angles that measure the action, but the inverse, the transcendental
magnitudes of the sines.

It is important to keep in mind, that in both these examples,
"dimension" is not a mathematical construct, but is associated with a
distinct physical principle, which is then associated with a distinct
species of magnitude, and, as Riemann emphasizes, the number of
dimensions is increased by the discovery of each new physical
principles.

This concept of magnitude is consistent with Schiller's expression in
"On the Aesthetic Estimation of Magnitude":

"All comparative estimation of magnitude, however, be it abstract or
physical, be it wholly or only partly determined, leads only to
relative, and never to absolute magnitude; for if an object actually
exceeds the measure which we assume to be a maximum, it can still always
be asked, by how many times the measure is exceeded. It is certainly a
large thing in relation to its species, but yet not the largest
possible, and once the constraint is exceeded, it can be exceeded again
and again, into infinity. Now, however, we are seeking absolute
magnitude, for this alone can contain in itself the basis of a higher
order, since all relative magnitudes, as such, are like to one another.
Since nothing can compel our mind to halt its business, it must be the
mind's power of imagination which sets a limit for that activity. In
other words, the estimation of magnitude must cease to be logical, it
must be achieved aesthetically.

"If I estimate a magnitude in a logical fashion, I always relate it to
my cognitive faculty; if I estimate it aesthetically, I relate it to my
faculty of sensibility. In the first case, I experience something about
the object, in the second case, on the contrary. I only experience
something within me, caused by the imagined magnitude of the object. In
the first case I behold something outside myself, in the second,
something within me. Thus, in reality, I am no longer measuring, I am no
longer estimating magnitude, rather I myself become for the moment a
magnitude to myself, and indeed an infinite one. That object which
causes me to be an infinite magnitude to myself, is called sublime."

Think in these terms about Gauss' development of the complex domain in
the context of his work on biquadratic residues, where Gauss
demonstrates that it is actually impossible to construct a concept of
magnitude devoid of dimensionality. As the discoveries that Plato made
famous in his Meno, Theatetus, and Timaeus dialogues, action along a
line, a surface, or a solid, is associated, in each case, with distinct
species of magnitude. The species of magnitude, associated with the
manifolds of lower dimensions, are found in the manifolds of higher
dimensions but not vice versa. Consequently, a paradox arises, if one
attempts to measure action in manifolds of higher dimensions, by
magnitudes that are produced in a manifold of lower dimensionality.

Look at this from the standpoint of the simple operations with numbers,
addition, subtraction, multiplication, division. (Riemann added Leibniz'
integration and differentiation, to the domain of simple operations, and
this will be taken up in future installments.) As the Theatetus reports,
addition of doubly-extended magnitudes, (i.e. areas) cannot be measured
by simply-extended magnitudes (i.e. lines), and yet, until Gauss, all
operations of Arithmetic were constrained by the underlying assumption
that each manifold could be measured by the same species of magnitudes.
This paradox reemerged from the Renaissance on, as the paradox
associated with the ?-1. Cardan, Leibniz, Huygens, and Kaestner, all
understood that this paradox required the need for a higher conception
of magnitude, while Newton, Euler and others, dismissed this magnitude
as "impossible" .

For Gauss, action in a doubly-extended manifold, could only be measured
by doubly- extended magnitudes, which he called "complex numbers". These
numbers are determined by two actions, rotation and extension, or
alternatively, simultaneous horizontal and vertical action, such as in
the bubble of a carpenters level. (It is about time to replace the
commonly used term "Cartesian coordinates" when referring to horizontal
and vertical action, with the more historically and conceptually
accurate, term, "Fermat coordinates".)

From this standpoint look at the basic concepts of Arithmetic with
respect to both simply- extended and doubly-extended magnitudes. Under
Gauss' concept of congruence, all numbers are ordered with respect to
the interval between them or the modulus. With respect to simply-
extended manifolds, that interval corresponds to a line segment. But,
with respect to a doubly- extended manifold, that interval has two
parts, up-down and back forth. Illustrate this with an example from
Gauss' second treatise on bi-quadratic residues. The modulus 5+2 *i*
"partitions" the entire complex domain, by a series of squares whose
sides are the hypothenuses of right triangles whose legs are 5 and 2.
For example, the square whose vertices are 0, 5+2 *i* , 3+7 *i* , -- 2+5
*i* . All complex numbers inside this square are not congruent to each
other. Now draw adjacent squares, such as the squares whose vertices are
5+2 *i* , 10+4 *i* , 8+9 *i* , 3+7 *i* ; or, 3+7 *i* , 8+9 *i* , 6+14
*i* , 1+12 *i* . All the numbers inside these squares are also not
congruent to each other, but each number is congruent to the one number
in each of the other squares, which is in the same relative position
within the square. For example, 2+4 *i* and 7+6 *i* , occupy the same
relative position within their respective squares, consequently, the
difference (interval) between them is the modulus 5+2 *i* .

Thus, the simple periodicity generated by congruences with respect to
real numbers, is transformed into a double periodicity with respect to
complex moduli. In a simply-extended manifold, therefore, subtraction
determines the linear interval between two numbers, while in a
doubly-extended manifold, subtraction determines the area interval
between two numbers.

Gauss next developed a concept of doubly-extended "complex"
multiplication, which will require you to re-think what you were taught
about multiplying numbers in elementary school. Simply-extended
multiplication was defined by Euclid as:

"15. A number is said to multiply a number when that which is multiplied
is added to itself as many times as there are units in the other, and
thus some number is produced."

But, even Euclid admits an inadequacy of this concept in the next
definition:

"16. And, when two numbers having multiplied one another make some
number, the number so produced is called plane, and its sides are the
numbers which have multiplied one another."

But, we already have discovered from Theatetus, that adding in a
simply-extended manifold, (lines) and adding in a doubly-extended
manifold (areas) are not the same, so how can adding one number to
itself "as many times as there are units in the other" (definition 15.)
produce the areas described in definition 16? This darkness arises from
the lack of a concept of multiply-extended magnitude.

The matter is resolved by a higher concept. If you look again at
Theatetus' alternating series of squares and rectangles, or the
expanding series of squares from the Meno, you can see that adding areas
produces a rotation and an extension. For example, the square whose area
is 1 is transformed into the rectangle whose area is two, by rotating a
line whose length is 1 90 degrees and multiplying its length by 2. The
next transformation, to a square whose area is 4, is produced by the
action of rotating the longer side of the rectangle and additional 90
degrees, and multiplying its length again by 2.

As Gauss' follower Neils Henrick Abel said, "To know the truth, you must
always invert." An inversion, therefore, will show us the general
principle that is, the action of adding rotation and multiplying
lengths, produces the geometric progression.

So in the complex domain, multiplication is the action of adding
rotations and multiplying lengths.

Illustrate this first with respect to prime numbers, by the example of
multiplying (1+2 *i* )(1-2 *i* ). 1+2 *i* denotes a rotation of 45
degrees and a linear extension of ?5. 1-2 *i* denotes a rotation of 45
degrees, in the opposite direction and a linear extension of ?5. To
multiply the two magnitudes, add the rotations, (which together equal 0)
and multiply the extensions (?5)(?5) = 5. Hence, 5, a prime number in a
simply-extended manifold, is a composite number in a doubly- extended
manifold. However, no such geometric action will produce odd-odd prime
numbers such as 7, 11, 19, etc.

Gauss saw this paradox as an excellent pedagogical demonstration of the
principle that the nature of the manifold determines nature of the
magnitudes. Since prime numbers produce all numbers by multiplication,
but cannot be produced themselves by multiplication, Gauss has shown
that these magnitudes, (prime numbers) that produce other magnitudes
(composite numbers) are themselves produced by the manifold in which the
action (multiplication) takes place . Some numbers are prime (undeniable
facts) but when a new principle (dimension) is added even those
undeniable facts, are changed!

Now, construct a geometric progression from a complex number, by
multiplying that number by itself repeatedly. For example, start with 1+
*i* which denotes a rotation of 45 degrees and an extension of ?2. Then
multiply 1+ *i* times 1+ *i* . This produces a rotation of 90 degrees
and an extension of 2. Repeating this again produces a rotation of 135
degrees and an extension of 4. If you continue this action you will see
unfolding points on a logarithmic spiral.

From this Gauss demonstrated that the periodicity produced by the
residues of a geometric progression, actually reflected magnitudes of a
higher manifold. In the next installment, we will illustrate this
discovery.
:::

::: {.addtoany_share_save_container .addtoany_content_bottom}
::: {.a2a_kit .a2a_kit_size_32 .addtoany_list a2a-url="http://lymcanada.org/24/" a2a-title="Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part  24 :  Let There Be Light"}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F24%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%20%2024%20%3A%20%20Let%20There%20Be%20Light "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F24%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%20%2024%20%3A%20%20Let%20There%20Be%20Light "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/google_plus?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F24%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%20%2024%20%3A%20%20Let%20There%20Be%20Light "Google+"){.a2a_button_google_plus}
[](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd .addtoany_share_save}
:::
:::
:::

[ [ Posted on ]{.screen-reader-text} [February 20, 2010 December 30,
2014](http://lymcanada.org/24/) ]{.posted-on} [ [ [ Author
]{.screen-reader-text} [Bruce
Director](http://lymcanada.org/author/bdirector/){.url .fn .n} ]{.author
.vcard} ]{.byline} [ [ Categories ]{.screen-reader-text}
[EN](http://lymcanada.org/category/en/) , [Riemann for
Anti-Dummies](http://lymcanada.org/category/science-1/c132-riemann-for-anti-dummies/)
]{.cat-links}
