::: entry-header
# Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 25 : Schiller and Gauss {#riemann-for-anti-dummies-part-25-schiller-and-gauss .entry-title}
:::

::: entry-content
::: pf-content
**Riemann for Anti-Dummies Part 25**

SCHILLER AND GAUSS

In his "Aesthetic Estimation of Magnitude", Friedrich Schiller discusses
a crucial ontological paradox that confronts science when it tries to
exceed existing axiomatic assumptions:

"The power of imagination, as the spontaneity of emotion, accomplishes a
twofold business in conceptualizing magnitude. It first gathers every
part of the given quantum into an empirical consciousness, which is
{apprehension}; secondly, it assembles the {successively collected}
parts into a pure self-consciousness, in which latter business, that of
{comprehension}, it acts entirely as pure understanding. That concept of
"I" (empirical consciousness), in other words, combines with each part
of the quantum: and through reflection upon these successively performed
syntheses, I recognize the identity of my "I" (pure self- consciousness)
in this series as a whole; in this way, the quantum first becomes an
object for me. I think A to B to C, and so forth, and while I watch my
activity; as it were, I say to myself: in A, as well as in B, and in C,
I am the acting subject.

"Apprehension takes place {successively}, and I grasp each partial
conception after the other....The synthesis, however, takes place
{simultaneously}, and through the concept of the self-identity of my "I"
in all preceding syntheses, I transcend anew the temporal conditions
under which they had occurred. All those different empirical conceptions
held by my "I" lose themselves in a single pure self-consciousness; the
subject, which had acted in A, and B, and C, and so forth, is I, the
eternally identical self...

"If the power of reflection transgresses this limit, and seeks to bring
together mental images, which already lie beyond the limit, into unity
of self-consciousness, it will lose as much in clarity as it gains in
scope. Between the circumference of the entirety of a mental image and
the distinctness of its parts, is an ever insuperable, specific
relationship, wherefore in each addition of a large quantum we lose as
much backward as we gain forwards and when we have reached the
end-point, we see the starting point vanish."

Schiller is not referring to quanta, which have magnitude, simply with
respect to quantity, but as Leibniz, Gauss and Riemann did, as
{universal principles}:

"Everything which has parts, is a quantum. Every perception, every idea
formed by comprehension, has a magnitude, just as the latter has a
domain and the former a content. Quantity in general, therefore, cannot
be meant, if one speaks about a difference of magnitude among objects.
Here we speak about such a quantity as characteristically belongs to an
object, that is to say, that which is not simply a {quantum}, but is at
the same time a {magnum},"

Think of Schiller's concept with respect to the successive discoveries
of Kepler and Gauss concerning planetary motion. If we think of the
position and speed of the planet at any given moment, as a quantum, it
is indeterminable, except as that quantum is a characteristic of the
whole orbit. In that sense, the indeterminable position and speed at the
moment, becomes determinable, only as an interval, a part, of the whole
orbit. The magnitude associated with that interval, is the area swept
out. This, magnitude cannot be measured by the successive addition of
the speeds and positions of the planet, which, owing to the
non-uniformity of the orbit are indeterminate, but, only as these are
grasped as an interval of the whole.

But, the orbits, in turn, are not self-defined, and their magnitudes are
indeterminable as individual orbits. Rather, the magnitudes of the
individual orbits can only be determined as intervals with respect to
the harmonic ordering among all the orbits at once. Inversely, that
harmonic ordering cannot be determined by successive addition of each
individual orbit, but only as intervals of the whole.

Further, as Gauss' investigation of the asteroids demonstrated, these
harmonic orderings are themselves changing, according to a still higher
harmonic ordering.

In other words, if we seek to determine the position and speed of the
planet at any moment, we are stymied until we are led to the orbit as a
whole. And, if we seek to determine the nature of an individual orbit,
we are stymied anew, until we are led to all the orbits. And, further,
if we try to determine the harmonic ordering of all the orbits, we will
be once again stymied, until we are led to the ordering of the harmonic
ordering. From this vantage point, the individual position and speed of
the planet, which was our first object of investigation, recedes, as the
deeper underlying principles come to the fore.

In the terms of Leibniz' calculus, the differential can be known only as
a function of the integral. Or, under Schiller's idea, if each principle
is thought of as a quantum, it can only be measured with respect to a
magnum, which in turn, is a quantum, to a, higher, yet to be discovered
magnum. In terms of Riemannian differential geometry, it is the highest
principle, which determines all lower ones.

Seen in this way, the principle of Mind, of which Kepler speaks as
governing the motion of the planet, is not a simple conception of a mind
interacting one on one between the planet and the Sun, but a principle
of Mind, as Schiller speaks of above, that comprehends its actions from
a higher and higher standpoint, which determine, the seemingly
indeterminable action in the small.

Gauss' investigation of bi-quadratic residues, and his and Riemann's
further development of differential geometry, provide the
pedagogical/epistemological capacity for our minds to grasp this
concept.

For Gauss, as for Plato, Fermat, and Leibniz, individual numbers are not
self-defined, but are rather defined by a higher principle, which Gauss
called congruence. Each modulus, thus, defines a certain indivisible
"orbit" in which all the numbers from 1 to the modulus minus 1, are
ordered. The ordering within any individual "orbit" is itself a function
of the characteristic of the modulus. For example, if the modulus is an
odd-even prime number, such as 5, 13, 17, etc. -1 is a residue of the
modulus minus 1 power, and ?-1 is the residue of the 1/4 the modulus
minus 1 power. If the modulus is an odd-odd prime number, ?-1 never
emerges. However, this characteristic of prime numbers, is not
determined by the individual prime numbers, but is rather a function of
the, still as yet undiscovered, "orbit", that determines prime numbers.

This characteristic of number led Gauss to search for a higher
principle, which he discovered by extending the concept of number from
simply-extended magnitudes, to doubly- extended magnitudes, which he
called complex numbers.

The significance of this is best grasped pedagogically, by way of an
example directly out of Gauss' second treatise on bi-quadratic residues.

Gauss thought of the complex domain as mapped onto a plane that is
covered by a grid of equally spaced squares, the vertices of each square
signify what Gauss called complex whole numbers. Each complex whole
number is of the form a +b *i* , where *i* stands for ?-1, and a and b
are whole numbers. Gauss called a ^2^ + b ^2^ the "norm" of the complex
number. Gaussian prime numbers, are those complex whole numbers, whose
norms are prime numbers.

Gauss' example uses the complex prime number 5+4 *i* . Taking this as
the modulus, the entire complex domain is "partitioned" into diamonds,
whose sides are the hypothenuses of right triangles whose legs are 5 and
4. (See last week's pedagogical.) Each diamond encloses 41 (5 ^2^ + 4
^2^ ) individual complex whole numbers, which are all incongruent to
each other, relative to modulus 5+4 *i* .

(You can illustrate this, if you take the diamond whose vertices are the
complex numbers 0, 5+4 *i* , 1+9 *i* , -4+5 *i* , as no two numbers
within this diamond will be separated by doubly- extended interval
greater than 5+4i. Now, construct another diamond whose vertices are 5+4
*i* , 10+8 *i* , 6+13 *i* , 1+9 *i* . Each complex number within this
new diamond will all be incongruent to every other within the diamond,
but, each complex number of the second diamond will be congruent to that
complex number that is in the same relative position in the first
diamond, specifically, the number whose difference with it is 5+4 *i* .)

Gauss then takes the complex number 1+2 *i* as a primitive root of 5+4
*i* . To grasp the meaning of this concept, see what happens,
geometrically, when 1+2i is raised successively to the powers, in a new
type of geometric progression. First you have (1+2 *i* ) ^0^ = 1; Next
is (1+2 *i* ) ^1^ = 1+2 *i* ; These two numbers define a triangle whose
vertices are 0, 1, 1+2 *i* . This will form a right triangle, whose legs
are 1 and 2 with hypotenuse ?5. The angle at the vertex 0 will be
63.4349 degrees, the angle at 1 will be 90 degrees and the angle at 1+2
*i* will be 26.5651 degrees. Now construct a similar triangle to this,
using the hypotenuse of this first triangle, as the shorter leg, placing
the 90 degree angle at the vertex 1+2i. This will define a new vertex at
-3+4 *i* , which is (1+2i) ^2^ . Repeat this process, constructing
another similar triangle, with right angle at -3+4i, and the side 0,
-3+4i as the short leg. This defines a new complex number, -11-2 *i* ,
which is (1+2 *i* ) ^4^ .

This chain of similar right triangles, is but a general case of the
famous chain of right triangles constructed by Theodorus, as reported by
Theatetus in Plato's dialogue.

Each new vertex of this chain of similar right triangles, is thus a new,
higher, power of 1+2 *i* , and all lie on a unique logarithmic spiral.
In other words, as this particular logarithmic spiral winds its way
around the complex domain, the complex whole numbers it intersects are
the powers of 1+2 *i* . Thus, the powers of 1+2 *i* are determined by a
higher principle, of logarithmic spiral action. They are as moments in a
orbit, or orbits in a planetary system.

Gauss continued this process, by continuing this spiral, so as to define
41 (5 ^2^ +4 ^2^ ) powers of 1+2 *i* , and investigated these spiral
points in a complex domain, "partitioned" into diamonds by modulus 5+4
*i* , with the beginning diamond having 0 at its center. (This is the
diamond whose vertices are (-1/2 -- 4 *i* ), (4 -- *i* ), (+4 *i* ), (-4
+ 1/2 *i* ).) Now think of these diamonds spreading out, partitioning
the complex domain, as the spiral winds its way around. Each time the
spiral intersects a complex whole number, that number will be a power of
1+2 *i* , and that number will be inside a particular diamond. Gauss
showed that the first 40 complex whole numbers the spiral intersects,
will each be in a different relative place within their respective
diamonds, than any other previous or succeeding one. In other words,
each complex whole number the spiral intersects, will be congruent to
only one of the complex whole numbers in the beginning diamond. Most
importantly, the 10th power of (1+2 *i* ) would be congruent to i, the
20th power to -1, the 30th power to -- *i* , and the 40th power to 1.
Then the cycle would repeat!

And so, if we begin with individual numbers we soon see these numbers
can not be self determined, and we are led to the generating principle
of congruence. But, these congruences produce "orbits" which can not be
self-determined and we are led to a still higher principle of extended
magnitudes. With each successive step, the individual numbers recede and
as the higher principles come more to the fore in our minds.

And, yes, there is a still higher principle at work which Gauss
discovered was connected directly to the Kepler problem. This was
indicated by one of the earliest entries in his diaries that read, "I
have discovered an amazing connection between bi-quadratic residues and
the lemniscate".

Our investigation of this remark, will have to wait for a future
installment.
:::

::: {.addtoany_share_save_container .addtoany_content_bottom}
::: {.a2a_kit .a2a_kit_size_32 .addtoany_list a2a-url="http://lymcanada.org/25/" a2a-title="Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part  25 :  Schiller and Gauss"}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F25%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%20%2025%20%3A%20%20Schiller%20and%20Gauss "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F25%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%20%2025%20%3A%20%20Schiller%20and%20Gauss "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/google_plus?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F25%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%20%2025%20%3A%20%20Schiller%20and%20Gauss "Google+"){.a2a_button_google_plus}
[](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd .addtoany_share_save}
:::
:::
:::

[ [ Posted on ]{.screen-reader-text} [February 20, 2010 December 30,
2014](http://lymcanada.org/25/) ]{.posted-on} [ [ [ Author
]{.screen-reader-text} [Bruce
Director](http://lymcanada.org/author/bdirector/){.url .fn .n} ]{.author
.vcard} ]{.byline} [ [ Categories ]{.screen-reader-text}
[EN](http://lymcanada.org/category/en/) , [Riemann for
Anti-Dummies](http://lymcanada.org/category/science-1/c132-riemann-for-anti-dummies/)
]{.cat-links}

::: entry-header
# Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 25 : Schiller and Gauss {#riemann-for-anti-dummies-part-25-schiller-and-gauss-1 .entry-title}
:::

::: entry-content
::: pf-content
**Riemann for Anti-Dummies Part 25**

SCHILLER AND GAUSS

In his "Aesthetic Estimation of Magnitude", Friedrich Schiller discusses
a crucial ontological paradox that confronts science when it tries to
exceed existing axiomatic assumptions:

"The power of imagination, as the spontaneity of emotion, accomplishes a
twofold business in conceptualizing magnitude. It first gathers every
part of the given quantum into an empirical consciousness, which is
{apprehension}; secondly, it assembles the {successively collected}
parts into a pure self-consciousness, in which latter business, that of
{comprehension}, it acts entirely as pure understanding. That concept of
"I" (empirical consciousness), in other words, combines with each part
of the quantum: and through reflection upon these successively performed
syntheses, I recognize the identity of my "I" (pure self- consciousness)
in this series as a whole; in this way, the quantum first becomes an
object for me. I think A to B to C, and so forth, and while I watch my
activity; as it were, I say to myself: in A, as well as in B, and in C,
I am the acting subject.

"Apprehension takes place {successively}, and I grasp each partial
conception after the other....The synthesis, however, takes place
{simultaneously}, and through the concept of the self-identity of my "I"
in all preceding syntheses, I transcend anew the temporal conditions
under which they had occurred. All those different empirical conceptions
held by my "I" lose themselves in a single pure self-consciousness; the
subject, which had acted in A, and B, and C, and so forth, is I, the
eternally identical self...

"If the power of reflection transgresses this limit, and seeks to bring
together mental images, which already lie beyond the limit, into unity
of self-consciousness, it will lose as much in clarity as it gains in
scope. Between the circumference of the entirety of a mental image and
the distinctness of its parts, is an ever insuperable, specific
relationship, wherefore in each addition of a large quantum we lose as
much backward as we gain forwards and when we have reached the
end-point, we see the starting point vanish."

Schiller is not referring to quanta, which have magnitude, simply with
respect to quantity, but as Leibniz, Gauss and Riemann did, as
{universal principles}:

"Everything which has parts, is a quantum. Every perception, every idea
formed by comprehension, has a magnitude, just as the latter has a
domain and the former a content. Quantity in general, therefore, cannot
be meant, if one speaks about a difference of magnitude among objects.
Here we speak about such a quantity as characteristically belongs to an
object, that is to say, that which is not simply a {quantum}, but is at
the same time a {magnum},"

Think of Schiller's concept with respect to the successive discoveries
of Kepler and Gauss concerning planetary motion. If we think of the
position and speed of the planet at any given moment, as a quantum, it
is indeterminable, except as that quantum is a characteristic of the
whole orbit. In that sense, the indeterminable position and speed at the
moment, becomes determinable, only as an interval, a part, of the whole
orbit. The magnitude associated with that interval, is the area swept
out. This, magnitude cannot be measured by the successive addition of
the speeds and positions of the planet, which, owing to the
non-uniformity of the orbit are indeterminate, but, only as these are
grasped as an interval of the whole.

But, the orbits, in turn, are not self-defined, and their magnitudes are
indeterminable as individual orbits. Rather, the magnitudes of the
individual orbits can only be determined as intervals with respect to
the harmonic ordering among all the orbits at once. Inversely, that
harmonic ordering cannot be determined by successive addition of each
individual orbit, but only as intervals of the whole.

Further, as Gauss' investigation of the asteroids demonstrated, these
harmonic orderings are themselves changing, according to a still higher
harmonic ordering.

In other words, if we seek to determine the position and speed of the
planet at any moment, we are stymied until we are led to the orbit as a
whole. And, if we seek to determine the nature of an individual orbit,
we are stymied anew, until we are led to all the orbits. And, further,
if we try to determine the harmonic ordering of all the orbits, we will
be once again stymied, until we are led to the ordering of the harmonic
ordering. From this vantage point, the individual position and speed of
the planet, which was our first object of investigation, recedes, as the
deeper underlying principles come to the fore.

In the terms of Leibniz' calculus, the differential can be known only as
a function of the integral. Or, under Schiller's idea, if each principle
is thought of as a quantum, it can only be measured with respect to a
magnum, which in turn, is a quantum, to a, higher, yet to be discovered
magnum. In terms of Riemannian differential geometry, it is the highest
principle, which determines all lower ones.

Seen in this way, the principle of Mind, of which Kepler speaks as
governing the motion of the planet, is not a simple conception of a mind
interacting one on one between the planet and the Sun, but a principle
of Mind, as Schiller speaks of above, that comprehends its actions from
a higher and higher standpoint, which determine, the seemingly
indeterminable action in the small.

Gauss' investigation of bi-quadratic residues, and his and Riemann's
further development of differential geometry, provide the
pedagogical/epistemological capacity for our minds to grasp this
concept.

For Gauss, as for Plato, Fermat, and Leibniz, individual numbers are not
self-defined, but are rather defined by a higher principle, which Gauss
called congruence. Each modulus, thus, defines a certain indivisible
"orbit" in which all the numbers from 1 to the modulus minus 1, are
ordered. The ordering within any individual "orbit" is itself a function
of the characteristic of the modulus. For example, if the modulus is an
odd-even prime number, such as 5, 13, 17, etc. -1 is a residue of the
modulus minus 1 power, and ?-1 is the residue of the 1/4 the modulus
minus 1 power. If the modulus is an odd-odd prime number, ?-1 never
emerges. However, this characteristic of prime numbers, is not
determined by the individual prime numbers, but is rather a function of
the, still as yet undiscovered, "orbit", that determines prime numbers.

This characteristic of number led Gauss to search for a higher
principle, which he discovered by extending the concept of number from
simply-extended magnitudes, to doubly- extended magnitudes, which he
called complex numbers.

The significance of this is best grasped pedagogically, by way of an
example directly out of Gauss' second treatise on bi-quadratic residues.

Gauss thought of the complex domain as mapped onto a plane that is
covered by a grid of equally spaced squares, the vertices of each square
signify what Gauss called complex whole numbers. Each complex whole
number is of the form a +b *i* , where *i* stands for ?-1, and a and b
are whole numbers. Gauss called a ^2^ + b ^2^ the "norm" of the complex
number. Gaussian prime numbers, are those complex whole numbers, whose
norms are prime numbers.

Gauss' example uses the complex prime number 5+4 *i* . Taking this as
the modulus, the entire complex domain is "partitioned" into diamonds,
whose sides are the hypothenuses of right triangles whose legs are 5 and
4. (See last week's pedagogical.) Each diamond encloses 41 (5 ^2^ + 4
^2^ ) individual complex whole numbers, which are all incongruent to
each other, relative to modulus 5+4 *i* .

(You can illustrate this, if you take the diamond whose vertices are the
complex numbers 0, 5+4 *i* , 1+9 *i* , -4+5 *i* , as no two numbers
within this diamond will be separated by doubly- extended interval
greater than 5+4i. Now, construct another diamond whose vertices are 5+4
*i* , 10+8 *i* , 6+13 *i* , 1+9 *i* . Each complex number within this
new diamond will all be incongruent to every other within the diamond,
but, each complex number of the second diamond will be congruent to that
complex number that is in the same relative position in the first
diamond, specifically, the number whose difference with it is 5+4 *i* .)

Gauss then takes the complex number 1+2 *i* as a primitive root of 5+4
*i* . To grasp the meaning of this concept, see what happens,
geometrically, when 1+2i is raised successively to the powers, in a new
type of geometric progression. First you have (1+2 *i* ) ^0^ = 1; Next
is (1+2 *i* ) ^1^ = 1+2 *i* ; These two numbers define a triangle whose
vertices are 0, 1, 1+2 *i* . This will form a right triangle, whose legs
are 1 and 2 with hypotenuse ?5. The angle at the vertex 0 will be
63.4349 degrees, the angle at 1 will be 90 degrees and the angle at 1+2
*i* will be 26.5651 degrees. Now construct a similar triangle to this,
using the hypotenuse of this first triangle, as the shorter leg, placing
the 90 degree angle at the vertex 1+2i. This will define a new vertex at
-3+4 *i* , which is (1+2i) ^2^ . Repeat this process, constructing
another similar triangle, with right angle at -3+4i, and the side 0,
-3+4i as the short leg. This defines a new complex number, -11-2 *i* ,
which is (1+2 *i* ) ^4^ .

This chain of similar right triangles, is but a general case of the
famous chain of right triangles constructed by Theodorus, as reported by
Theatetus in Plato's dialogue.

Each new vertex of this chain of similar right triangles, is thus a new,
higher, power of 1+2 *i* , and all lie on a unique logarithmic spiral.
In other words, as this particular logarithmic spiral winds its way
around the complex domain, the complex whole numbers it intersects are
the powers of 1+2 *i* . Thus, the powers of 1+2 *i* are determined by a
higher principle, of logarithmic spiral action. They are as moments in a
orbit, or orbits in a planetary system.

Gauss continued this process, by continuing this spiral, so as to define
41 (5 ^2^ +4 ^2^ ) powers of 1+2 *i* , and investigated these spiral
points in a complex domain, "partitioned" into diamonds by modulus 5+4
*i* , with the beginning diamond having 0 at its center. (This is the
diamond whose vertices are (-1/2 -- 4 *i* ), (4 -- *i* ), (+4 *i* ), (-4
+ 1/2 *i* ).) Now think of these diamonds spreading out, partitioning
the complex domain, as the spiral winds its way around. Each time the
spiral intersects a complex whole number, that number will be a power of
1+2 *i* , and that number will be inside a particular diamond. Gauss
showed that the first 40 complex whole numbers the spiral intersects,
will each be in a different relative place within their respective
diamonds, than any other previous or succeeding one. In other words,
each complex whole number the spiral intersects, will be congruent to
only one of the complex whole numbers in the beginning diamond. Most
importantly, the 10th power of (1+2 *i* ) would be congruent to i, the
20th power to -1, the 30th power to -- *i* , and the 40th power to 1.
Then the cycle would repeat!

And so, if we begin with individual numbers we soon see these numbers
can not be self determined, and we are led to the generating principle
of congruence. But, these congruences produce "orbits" which can not be
self-determined and we are led to a still higher principle of extended
magnitudes. With each successive step, the individual numbers recede and
as the higher principles come more to the fore in our minds.

And, yes, there is a still higher principle at work which Gauss
discovered was connected directly to the Kepler problem. This was
indicated by one of the earliest entries in his diaries that read, "I
have discovered an amazing connection between bi-quadratic residues and
the lemniscate".

Our investigation of this remark, will have to wait for a future
installment.
:::

::: {.addtoany_share_save_container .addtoany_content_bottom}
::: {.a2a_kit .a2a_kit_size_32 .addtoany_list a2a-url="http://lymcanada.org/25/" a2a-title="Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part  25 :  Schiller and Gauss"}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F25%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%20%2025%20%3A%20%20Schiller%20and%20Gauss "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F25%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%20%2025%20%3A%20%20Schiller%20and%20Gauss "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/google_plus?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F25%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%20%2025%20%3A%20%20Schiller%20and%20Gauss "Google+"){.a2a_button_google_plus}
[](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd .addtoany_share_save}
:::
:::
:::

[ [ Posted on ]{.screen-reader-text} [February 20, 2010 December 30,
2014](http://lymcanada.org/25/) ]{.posted-on} [ [ [ Author
]{.screen-reader-text} [Bruce
Director](http://lymcanada.org/author/bdirector/){.url .fn .n} ]{.author
.vcard} ]{.byline} [ [ Categories ]{.screen-reader-text}
[EN](http://lymcanada.org/category/en/) , [Riemann for
Anti-Dummies](http://lymcanada.org/category/science-1/c132-riemann-for-anti-dummies/)
]{.cat-links}
