::: entry-header
# Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 29 : The Crimes of Klein {#riemann-for-anti-dummies-part-29-the-crimes-of-klein .entry-title}
:::

::: entry-content
::: pf-content
::: {align="justify"}
**Riemann for Anti-Dummies Part 29**

THE CRIMES OF KLEIN

When working through the conceptions underlying Gauss' 1799 proof of the
fundamental theorem of algebra, or, Gauss' discovery of the principles
behind the division of the circle (to take only two examples), one is
immediately confronted with the fact that these discoveries arise from
explicitly anti-deductive methods of thinking. Most difficulties
experienced by modern students attempting to work through these
discoveries, are rooted in the tendency of those individuals to revert
to ingrained habits of deductive thinking, just at the point when only
an explicitly anti-deductive, creative leap will do. "Where's the cube
in Archytus' construction?"; "What exactly is Gauss trying to prove?";
"I understand what you said, but I still don't understand what it
means," are some common symptoms of this affliction.
:::

The serious person can take heart that such symptoms need not indicate
an incurable condition, but it is only the recurring effects of the
malicious teaching methods most people today have suffered through. It
may be helpful to those suffering from these effects, to take a clinical
look at how this "deductivizing" was introduced into modern educational
practices by G.W.F. Hegel's grandson-in-law, Felix Klein. As a talented
mathematician, Klein was not as radical a reductionist or as openly
fascistic as Russell, Kronecker or Helmholtz. Yet his method was pure
Bogomilism, nevertheless. Rather than try and obliterate the creative
discoveries of Leibniz, Gauss and Riemann, Klein adopted a seemingly
"middle ground" so to speak, in which the discoveries were stripped of
their creative insight, and re-cast in deductive, i.e. impotent, form.

While Klein had an extensive influence over the teaching methods of a
wide domain of scientific subjects, it is sufficient, for our purposes
at this moment, to look at his treatment of Gauss' early discoveries, to
obtain the clinical benefit of freeing those individuals, who, knowingly
or not, have been victimized by Klein's crime.

As discussed in the recent pedagogicals of this series, Gauss' early
discoveries have their origin in the paradoxes arising from the
investigations of "powers" as that concept is defined by Plato, and how
these paradoxes arise in the classical problems of doubling the cube and
trisecting an angle. For Plato, Cusa, Kepler, Leibniz, Kaestner, Gauss,
Riemann, these investigations led into the deepest questions concerning
the relationship of man to the universe. However, in his 1895 lectures,
"Famous Problems of Elementary Geometry", Klein reduces these problems
to the following, which will seem uneasily familiar to most students
today:

"In all these problems the ancients sought in vain for a solution with
straight edge and compasses, and the celebrity of these problems is due
chiefly to the fact that their solution seemed to demand the use of
appliances of a higher order..."

This already is complete fraud. Plato's circle did not consider the
straight edge and compass as "appliances", but as Kepler summarizes the
question in the first book of the "Harmonies of the World", the question
under investigation was the "knowability" of magnitudes. That is, which
magnitudes were "knowable" from the circumference and diameter of a
circle, and which were "unknowable".

Klein continues, "At the outset we must insist upon the difference
between practical and theoretical constructions. For example, if we need
a divided circle as a measuring instrument, we construct it simply on
trial. Theoretically, in earlier times, it was possible (i.e. by the use
of straight edge and compasses) only to divide the circle into a number
of parts represented by 2 ^n^ , 3 and 5 and their products. Gauss added
other cases by showing the possibilty of the division into parts where p
is a prime number of the form p = (2 ^2p^ ) + 1, and the impossibility
for all other numbers. No practical advantage is derived from these
results; the significance of Gauss' developments is purely theoretical."

Klein's separation of the theoretical and practical is pure evil
Bogomilism, in addition to being a fraud. One need look no further, than
Erathosthenes' account of the history of the duplication of the cube, as
reported by Theon of Smyrna:

"Eratosthenes in his work entitled "Plotinicus" relates that, when the
god proclaimed to the Delians through the oracle that, in order to get
rid of a plague, they should construct an altar double that of the
existing one, their craftsmen fell into great perplexity in their
efforts to discover how a solid could be made the double of a similar
solid; they therefore went to ask Plato about it, and he replied that
the oracle meant, not that the god wanted an altar of double the size,
but that he wished, in setting them the task, to shame the Greeks for
their neglect of mathematics and their contempt of geometry."

Where is the separation of the theoretical from the practical in
Eratosthenes account? Was it purely a theoretical matter, that the
Delians had become so morally corrupt by their neglect of the cognitive
powers of the mind, that they had become victims of a deadly plague?

As the Thirty Years War began to unfold in full horror, Kepler, on the
occasion of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the publication of his
"Mysterium Cosmographicum", invoked the "practical" benefits of the
power of cognition, "would that even now indeed there may still, after
the reversal of Austrian affairs which followed, be a place for Plato's
oracular saying. For when Greece was on fire on all sides with a long
civil war, and was troubled with all the evils which usually accompany
civil war, he was consulted about a Delian Riddle, and was seeking a
pretext for suggesting salutary advice to the peoples. At length he
replied that, according to Apollo's opinion Greece would be peaceful if
the Greeks turned to geometry and other philosophical studies, as these
studies would lead their spirits from ambition and other forms of greed,
out of which wars and other evils arise, to the love of peace and to
moderation in all things."

And Gauss, himself, when installed as head of the Goettingen University
Observatory, pronounced that the political troubles that had befallen
Europe at that time, arose from a contempt for purely cognitive
discoveries.

Klein is deadly wrong. Gauss' discoveries were not purely theoretical.
Recognizing that is crucial to being able to grasp elementary
mathematics from a truly advanced, (LaRouchian) standpoint.
:::

::: {.addtoany_share_save_container .addtoany_content_bottom}
::: {.a2a_kit .a2a_kit_size_32 .addtoany_list a2a-url="http://lymcanada.org/29/" a2a-title="Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part  29 :  The Crimes of Klein"}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F29%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%20%2029%20%3A%20%20The%20Crimes%20of%20Klein "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F29%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%20%2029%20%3A%20%20The%20Crimes%20of%20Klein "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/google_plus?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F29%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%20%2029%20%3A%20%20The%20Crimes%20of%20Klein "Google+"){.a2a_button_google_plus}
[](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd .addtoany_share_save}
:::
:::
:::

[ [ Posted on ]{.screen-reader-text} [February 20, 2010 December 30,
2014](http://lymcanada.org/29/) ]{.posted-on} [ [ [ Author
]{.screen-reader-text} [Bruce
Director](http://lymcanada.org/author/bdirector/){.url .fn .n} ]{.author
.vcard} ]{.byline} [ [ Categories ]{.screen-reader-text}
[EN](http://lymcanada.org/category/en/) , [Riemann for
Anti-Dummies](http://lymcanada.org/category/science-1/c132-riemann-for-anti-dummies/)
]{.cat-links}

::: entry-header
# Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 29 : The Crimes of Klein {#riemann-for-anti-dummies-part-29-the-crimes-of-klein-1 .entry-title}
:::

::: entry-content
::: pf-content
::: {align="justify"}
**Riemann for Anti-Dummies Part 29**

THE CRIMES OF KLEIN

When working through the conceptions underlying Gauss' 1799 proof of the
fundamental theorem of algebra, or, Gauss' discovery of the principles
behind the division of the circle (to take only two examples), one is
immediately confronted with the fact that these discoveries arise from
explicitly anti-deductive methods of thinking. Most difficulties
experienced by modern students attempting to work through these
discoveries, are rooted in the tendency of those individuals to revert
to ingrained habits of deductive thinking, just at the point when only
an explicitly anti-deductive, creative leap will do. "Where's the cube
in Archytus' construction?"; "What exactly is Gauss trying to prove?";
"I understand what you said, but I still don't understand what it
means," are some common symptoms of this affliction.
:::

The serious person can take heart that such symptoms need not indicate
an incurable condition, but it is only the recurring effects of the
malicious teaching methods most people today have suffered through. It
may be helpful to those suffering from these effects, to take a clinical
look at how this "deductivizing" was introduced into modern educational
practices by G.W.F. Hegel's grandson-in-law, Felix Klein. As a talented
mathematician, Klein was not as radical a reductionist or as openly
fascistic as Russell, Kronecker or Helmholtz. Yet his method was pure
Bogomilism, nevertheless. Rather than try and obliterate the creative
discoveries of Leibniz, Gauss and Riemann, Klein adopted a seemingly
"middle ground" so to speak, in which the discoveries were stripped of
their creative insight, and re-cast in deductive, i.e. impotent, form.

While Klein had an extensive influence over the teaching methods of a
wide domain of scientific subjects, it is sufficient, for our purposes
at this moment, to look at his treatment of Gauss' early discoveries, to
obtain the clinical benefit of freeing those individuals, who, knowingly
or not, have been victimized by Klein's crime.

As discussed in the recent pedagogicals of this series, Gauss' early
discoveries have their origin in the paradoxes arising from the
investigations of "powers" as that concept is defined by Plato, and how
these paradoxes arise in the classical problems of doubling the cube and
trisecting an angle. For Plato, Cusa, Kepler, Leibniz, Kaestner, Gauss,
Riemann, these investigations led into the deepest questions concerning
the relationship of man to the universe. However, in his 1895 lectures,
"Famous Problems of Elementary Geometry", Klein reduces these problems
to the following, which will seem uneasily familiar to most students
today:

"In all these problems the ancients sought in vain for a solution with
straight edge and compasses, and the celebrity of these problems is due
chiefly to the fact that their solution seemed to demand the use of
appliances of a higher order..."

This already is complete fraud. Plato's circle did not consider the
straight edge and compass as "appliances", but as Kepler summarizes the
question in the first book of the "Harmonies of the World", the question
under investigation was the "knowability" of magnitudes. That is, which
magnitudes were "knowable" from the circumference and diameter of a
circle, and which were "unknowable".

Klein continues, "At the outset we must insist upon the difference
between practical and theoretical constructions. For example, if we need
a divided circle as a measuring instrument, we construct it simply on
trial. Theoretically, in earlier times, it was possible (i.e. by the use
of straight edge and compasses) only to divide the circle into a number
of parts represented by 2 ^n^ , 3 and 5 and their products. Gauss added
other cases by showing the possibilty of the division into parts where p
is a prime number of the form p = (2 ^2p^ ) + 1, and the impossibility
for all other numbers. No practical advantage is derived from these
results; the significance of Gauss' developments is purely theoretical."

Klein's separation of the theoretical and practical is pure evil
Bogomilism, in addition to being a fraud. One need look no further, than
Erathosthenes' account of the history of the duplication of the cube, as
reported by Theon of Smyrna:

"Eratosthenes in his work entitled "Plotinicus" relates that, when the
god proclaimed to the Delians through the oracle that, in order to get
rid of a plague, they should construct an altar double that of the
existing one, their craftsmen fell into great perplexity in their
efforts to discover how a solid could be made the double of a similar
solid; they therefore went to ask Plato about it, and he replied that
the oracle meant, not that the god wanted an altar of double the size,
but that he wished, in setting them the task, to shame the Greeks for
their neglect of mathematics and their contempt of geometry."

Where is the separation of the theoretical from the practical in
Eratosthenes account? Was it purely a theoretical matter, that the
Delians had become so morally corrupt by their neglect of the cognitive
powers of the mind, that they had become victims of a deadly plague?

As the Thirty Years War began to unfold in full horror, Kepler, on the
occasion of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the publication of his
"Mysterium Cosmographicum", invoked the "practical" benefits of the
power of cognition, "would that even now indeed there may still, after
the reversal of Austrian affairs which followed, be a place for Plato's
oracular saying. For when Greece was on fire on all sides with a long
civil war, and was troubled with all the evils which usually accompany
civil war, he was consulted about a Delian Riddle, and was seeking a
pretext for suggesting salutary advice to the peoples. At length he
replied that, according to Apollo's opinion Greece would be peaceful if
the Greeks turned to geometry and other philosophical studies, as these
studies would lead their spirits from ambition and other forms of greed,
out of which wars and other evils arise, to the love of peace and to
moderation in all things."

And Gauss, himself, when installed as head of the Goettingen University
Observatory, pronounced that the political troubles that had befallen
Europe at that time, arose from a contempt for purely cognitive
discoveries.

Klein is deadly wrong. Gauss' discoveries were not purely theoretical.
Recognizing that is crucial to being able to grasp elementary
mathematics from a truly advanced, (LaRouchian) standpoint.
:::

::: {.addtoany_share_save_container .addtoany_content_bottom}
::: {.a2a_kit .a2a_kit_size_32 .addtoany_list a2a-url="http://lymcanada.org/29/" a2a-title="Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part  29 :  The Crimes of Klein"}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F29%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%20%2029%20%3A%20%20The%20Crimes%20of%20Klein "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F29%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%20%2029%20%3A%20%20The%20Crimes%20of%20Klein "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/google_plus?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F29%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%20%2029%20%3A%20%20The%20Crimes%20of%20Klein "Google+"){.a2a_button_google_plus}
[](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd .addtoany_share_save}
:::
:::
:::

[ [ Posted on ]{.screen-reader-text} [February 20, 2010 December 30,
2014](http://lymcanada.org/29/) ]{.posted-on} [ [ [ Author
]{.screen-reader-text} [Bruce
Director](http://lymcanada.org/author/bdirector/){.url .fn .n} ]{.author
.vcard} ]{.byline} [ [ Categories ]{.screen-reader-text}
[EN](http://lymcanada.org/category/en/) , [Riemann for
Anti-Dummies](http://lymcanada.org/category/science-1/c132-riemann-for-anti-dummies/)
]{.cat-links}
