::: entry-header
# Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 30 : The Powers of One {#riemann-for-anti-dummies-part-30-the-powers-of-one .entry-title}
:::

::: entry-content
::: pf-content
::: {align="center"}
**Riemann For Anti-Dummies Part 30**
:::

THE POWERS OF ONE

On the morning of March 30, 1796, Carl Friedrich Gauss discovered that
the way people had been thinking for more than 2000 years was wrong.
That was the day, when, after an intensive period of concentration, he
saw on a deeper level than anyone before, the "profound connection"
between transcendental magnitudes and higher Arithmetic.

The first public announcement of his discovery was at the initiative of
E.A.W. Zimmerman, a collaborator of Abraham Kaestner, who headed the
Collegium Carolineum, the school for classical studies, where Gauss had
received his preparatory education. The notice was carried in the April
1796 issue of Allgemeine Literaturzeitung:

"It is known to every beginner in geometry that various regular
polygons, namely the triangle; tetragon; pentagon; 15-gon, and those
which arise by the continued doubling of the number of sides of one of
them, are geometrically constructable.

"One was already that far in the time of Euclid, and, it seems, it has
generally been said since then that the field of elementary geometry
extends no farther; at least I know of no successful attempt to extend
its limits on this side.

"So much the more, methinks, does the discovery deserve attention, that
in addition to those ordinary polygons there is still another group, for
example the 17-gon, that are capable of geometric construction. This
discovery is really only a special corollary to a theory of greater
scope, not yet completed, and is to be presented to the public as soon
as it has received its completion."

Carl Friedrich Gauss\
Student of Mathematics at Goettingen

"It deserves mentioning, that Mr. Gauss is now in his 18th year, and
devoted himself here in Brunswick with equal success to philosophy and
classical literature as well as higher mathematics."

E.A.W. Zimmerman, Prof.

Gauss did not construct the 17-gon. As the announcement indicates, the
constructability of the 17-gon is merely a corollary of a much deeper
principle--the generation of magnitudes of higher powers, as that
principle was understood by Plato, Cusa, Kepler, Fermat, Leibniz and the
Bernoulli's. As with his contemporaneous work on the fundamental theorem
of algebra, Gauss' approach was explicitly anti-deductive, discovering a
common physical principle that underlay both geometry and number. It was
also a direct confrontation with the failed Aristotelean methods of the
likes of Euler and Lagrange who understood the circle as an object in
visible space and numbers as abstract formalisms.

Today's pedagogical exercise is the first of two, intended to guide the
reader through the relevant concepts of Gauss' method. It will require
some "heavy lifting" and the reader is advised to work it through all
the way to the end, no matter how arduous it seems along the way, and
then look back, surveying what has been gained from the vantage point of
the summit. The reader is also advised to review the preliminary work on
Gauss' theory of the division of the circle that was the subject of the
several past pedagogicals, as it was summarized in the Winter 2001-2002
edition of 21st Century Science and Techonlogy, and the pedagogical
exercises on the residues of powers (Riemann for Anti-Dummies Parts
20-25.) (Reference will also be made to several figures)

**Polygons As Powers**

As Gauss' announcement indicates, by Euclid's time, geometers had
succeeded in finding the magnitudes that divided a circle in certain
ways. What was not so evident, was why those ways and not others? From
the standpoint of sense certainty, the circle, like the line, appears
uniform and everywhere the same. Why then, is it not, like the line,
divisible into whatever number of parts one desires? What unseen
principle is determining which divisions are possible, and which are
not?

Yet, when the circle is considered as a unit of action in the complex
domain, it becomes evident that the division of the circle is based on
the principle that generates magnitudes of successively higher powers.
Those who have worked through the pedagogical exercises on Gauss' 1799
doctoral dissertation are familiar with how this works. There we saw
that algebraic powers are generated by a non-algebraic, physical
principle, as expressed, for example, by the catenary. This principle
belongs to the domain of functions that Leibniz called transcendentala,
and is expressed mathematically by the equiangular spiral, or
alternatively, the exponential (logarithmic) functions. Gauss showed
that these transcendental functions were themselves part of a higher
class of functions that could only be adequately known through images in
the complex domain.

From this standpoint, the generation of magnitudes of any algebraic
power correspond to an angular change within an equiangular spiral.
"Squaring" is the action associated with doubling the angle within an
equiangular spiral, "cubing" by tripling, fourth power by quadrupling,
and so forth. These angular changes are, consequently, what generates
magnitudes of succesively higher algebraic powers. When the circle is
correctly understood as merely a special case of an equiangular spiral,
the generation of algebraic powers is reflected as a mapping of one
circle onto another. Squaring, for example, maps one circle onto another
twice, cubing maps three times, and so on for the higher powers. (The
reader is referred to the figures from the pedagogical discussions on
the fundamental theorem of algebra.)

The regular divisions of the circle are simply the inversion of this
action. Each rotation around the "squared" circle divides the original
circle in half. Each rotation around the "cubed" circle divides the
original circle into thirds, each rotation around the fourth power
circle, divides the original circle into fourths, and so on.
Consequently, the vertices of a regular polygon, are the points on the
original circle, that correspond to the complete rotations around the
"powered" circle and the number of vertices corresponds to the degree of
the power. For example, the fifth power will produce, by inversion, the
five vertices of the pentagon; the inversion of the seventh power, will
produce the seven vertices of the heptagon, etc. All the vertices of a
given polygon are generated, "all at once", so to speak, by one
function, which is the inversion of the function that generates the
corresponding power. (By Gauss' time, such inversions had come to be
called "roots", not to be confused with the misapplication of that term
by ignorant translators of Plato's word, "dunamis".) Herein lies the
paradox. If the triangle, square and pentagon are inversions of the
generation of third, fourth, and fifth powers respectively, how come
they are constructable and other polygons are not? (Constructable is
used here in the same sense as Kepler uses the term "knowable" in the
first book of the Harmonies of the World. By "knowable", Kepler meant
those magnitudes that were commensurate with the diameter of the circle,
part of the diameter, or the square of the diameter or its part. These
magnitudes are the only magnitudes, "constructable" from the circle and
its diameter, or by straight-edge and compass. All such magnitudes
correspond to "square roots" or magnitudes of the second power.
Magnitudes of higher powers, are not "knowable" from the circle alone,
as is evident from the problem of doubling the cube, or trisecting the
angle.)

**Prime Numbers are Ones**

It was Gauss' insight to recognize that the solution to this paradox
lay, not in the visible circle, but in the nature of prime numbers. To
begin with, throw out the common formal definition of prime numbers, and
consider a physical principle in which prime numbers arise. This can be
most efficiently illustrated by example. Perform the following
experiment: draw 10 dots, in a roughly circular configuration, and
number them 0 to 9. Connect the 10 dots sequentially (0, 1, 2,...) and
call that sequence 1. Now connect every other dot, (0, 2, 4, 6...) and
call that action sequence 2. Then every third dot, (0, 3, 6, 9, ..., for
sequence 3) then every fourth dot, (0, 4, 8, ..., sequence 4) and so on.

Notice, that some sequences succeeded in connecting all 10 dots, namely,
sequences 1, 3, 7 and 9, while sequences 2, 4, 5, and 8 connected only
some of the dots. In the case of the latter, sequences, 2 and 5 became
completed actions within one rotation, whereas 4 and 8 did not become
completed actions until after more than one rotation.

Numbers are not formal symbols (or objects), to be manipulated according
to a set of formal rules, but are relationships arising from physical
action. In the above example, the number 10 becomes a One, or, as Gauss
called it, a modulus. The numbers 1 through 9 are types of actions, not
collections of things. With respect to modulus 10, the numbers (actions)
1, 3, 7, and 9 are called relatively prime, because those actions do not
divide the modulus. The numbers 2, and 5, are called factors of 10,
because those actions do divide the modulus within one rotation. (The
numbers 4 and 8, divide the modulus but not within one rotation because
they are not factors themselves but they share a common factor (namely
2) with 10.)

These relationships, of factors and relative primeness, are determined
only by the nature of the modulus. If you begin sequence 2 on dot #1
instead of dot #0, it still connects only 5 dots. Similarly, if you
begin sequence 3 on dot #1, it will still be relatively prime to 10.
Additionally, if you continue the experiment with sequences 11, 12, 13,
etc., the results will be identical to the sequences 1, 2, 3, etc.
except that one rotation will be added. Gauss called these numbers
congruent relative to modulus 10.

Thus, the modulus defines certain relationships, relative to the entire
universe of whole numbers, in which some numbers are factors, some
numbers are relatively prime, and some numbers are not factors
themselves, but contain factors of the modulus.

However, when one dot is added, and the same experiment is performed
with respect to 11 dots, all the sequences connect all the dots. Thus,
11 has no factors and all numbers are relatively prime to it. The
relationship of modulus 11 to the entire universe of whole numbers is
quite different than the modulus 10.

The modulus is the One. Some moduli, such as 10, define some numbers as
factors,and some numbers as relatively prime and are called "composite".
Those moduli under which all numbers are prime, are known as prime
numbers.

There is nothing absolute about the quality of primeness. Relatively
prime numbers gain this characteristic relative to a one (modulus).
Those numbers that are prime relative to the One, are absolutely prime.
(Gauss, in his treatises on bi-quadratic residues, would later show that
even this characteristic of absolute primeness is not really absolute
but relative to a still higher principle.)

**Polygons as Planetary Systems**

This leads us back to the original paradox. If the prime numbers are
irreducible Ones, how come some prime number divisions of the circle are
constructable and others not?

Take another look at the image of a circle in the complex domain. The
vertices of a regular polygon are the roots (inversions) of a
corresponding power. This relationship of "roots" and "powers" produces
a type of harmonic "planetary system" for each polygon in which only
those "planetary orbits" that correspond to the "roots" of that "power"
are possible, and, these "roots" have a unique harmonic relationship to
each other, whose characteristics are determined by the number-theoretic
characteristics of the prime number.

Illustrate this pedagogically by an example. The vertices of a regular
pentagon are the five "roots" of 1 and each of these "roots" is a
complex number that has the power to produce a fifth degree magnitude.
Such complex numbers represented the combined action of rotation and
extension. Since in a circle the extension is constant, the complex
numbers are at the endpoints of equally spaced radii. To construct the
polygon it is necessary to determine the positions of these radii. To do
this Gauss used the method of inversion and determined the positions of
the radii from the harmonic relations among them. Even without knowing
the positions of the radii, the harmonic relations can be known because
the radii are inversions (roots) of powers. In other words, the vertices
of the polygon are the endpoints of equally spaced radii.

But don't look at the endpoints (visible objects). Look for why the
radii are equally spaced. They are equally spaced because they are the
roots of an algebraic power. To illustrate this use the pentagon as an
example, draw a circle with five approximately equally spaced radii.
This should look like an "inside out" pentagon. (Since we are
investigating only the relationships among the radii at this point it is
not necessary that the radii be exactly equally spaced.)

Label the endpoints of the radii 1, a, b, c, d, with "a" representing
1/5 of a rotation, "b", 2/5, "c", 3/5, "d", 4/5 and "1" being 1 full
rotation. If any of these individual angular actions is repeated
(multiplied) five times, the resulting action will end up at 1. In other
words, a ^5^ , b ^5^ , c ^5^ and d ^5^ are all equal to 1. Furthermore,
a ^0^ =1, a ^1^ =a, a ^2^ =b, a ^3^ =c, a ^4^ =d; b ^0^ =1, b ^1^ =b, b
^2^ =d, b ^3^ =a, b ^4^ =c; c ^0^ =1, c ^1^ =c, c ^2^ =a,c ^3^ =d, c ^4^
=b; d ^0^ =1, d ^1^ =d, d ^2^ =c, d ^3^ =b, d ^4^ =a. Thus, any vertex
can generate all the others. (For the general case, each of the vertices
corresponds to a complex number of the form a + b ?-1, such that (a +
b?-1) ^n^ =1 for all "n's" of an "n" sided polygon.)

In the example of the pentagon, five is the modulus, the One, which
establishes a certain harmonic ordering under which there are five and
only five "orbits". A different modulus would produce a different number
of "orbits", but the relationship just illustrated will remain; only the
number of "orbits" will have changed, and consequently, the nature of
the harmonies. Notice the congruence of these actions with our earlier
experiment with dots illustrating the physical principle from which
primeness, relative primeness and factors arise. Notice the similarity
between the power sequences generated from each complex root, and the
different number sequences used to connect the dots. This congruence is
not discovered by looking at the visible objects, but by a method
Leibniz called, "Geometry of Position", or "analysis situs", or what
Gauss called, "geometrica situs". It reflects a higher principle,
independent of any particular number and begins to shed light on that
"profound connection" Gauss discovered between the geometry of
transcendental functions and higher Arithmetic.

Next week we'll look further into that connection.
:::

::: {.addtoany_share_save_container .addtoany_content_bottom}
::: {.a2a_kit .a2a_kit_size_32 .addtoany_list a2a-url="http://lymcanada.org/30/" a2a-title="Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part  30 :  The Powers of One"}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F30%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%20%2030%20%3A%20%20The%20Powers%20of%20One "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F30%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%20%2030%20%3A%20%20The%20Powers%20of%20One "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/google_plus?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F30%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%20%2030%20%3A%20%20The%20Powers%20of%20One "Google+"){.a2a_button_google_plus}
[](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd .addtoany_share_save}
:::
:::
:::

[ [ Posted on ]{.screen-reader-text} [February 20, 2010 December 30,
2014](http://lymcanada.org/30/) ]{.posted-on} [ [ [ Author
]{.screen-reader-text} [Bruce
Director](http://lymcanada.org/author/bdirector/){.url .fn .n} ]{.author
.vcard} ]{.byline} [ [ Categories ]{.screen-reader-text}
[EN](http://lymcanada.org/category/en/) , [Riemann for
Anti-Dummies](http://lymcanada.org/category/science-1/c132-riemann-for-anti-dummies/)
]{.cat-links}

::: entry-header
# Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 30 : The Powers of One {#riemann-for-anti-dummies-part-30-the-powers-of-one-1 .entry-title}
:::

::: entry-content
::: pf-content
::: {align="center"}
**Riemann For Anti-Dummies Part 30**
:::

THE POWERS OF ONE

On the morning of March 30, 1796, Carl Friedrich Gauss discovered that
the way people had been thinking for more than 2000 years was wrong.
That was the day, when, after an intensive period of concentration, he
saw on a deeper level than anyone before, the "profound connection"
between transcendental magnitudes and higher Arithmetic.

The first public announcement of his discovery was at the initiative of
E.A.W. Zimmerman, a collaborator of Abraham Kaestner, who headed the
Collegium Carolineum, the school for classical studies, where Gauss had
received his preparatory education. The notice was carried in the April
1796 issue of Allgemeine Literaturzeitung:

"It is known to every beginner in geometry that various regular
polygons, namely the triangle; tetragon; pentagon; 15-gon, and those
which arise by the continued doubling of the number of sides of one of
them, are geometrically constructable.

"One was already that far in the time of Euclid, and, it seems, it has
generally been said since then that the field of elementary geometry
extends no farther; at least I know of no successful attempt to extend
its limits on this side.

"So much the more, methinks, does the discovery deserve attention, that
in addition to those ordinary polygons there is still another group, for
example the 17-gon, that are capable of geometric construction. This
discovery is really only a special corollary to a theory of greater
scope, not yet completed, and is to be presented to the public as soon
as it has received its completion."

Carl Friedrich Gauss\
Student of Mathematics at Goettingen

"It deserves mentioning, that Mr. Gauss is now in his 18th year, and
devoted himself here in Brunswick with equal success to philosophy and
classical literature as well as higher mathematics."

E.A.W. Zimmerman, Prof.

Gauss did not construct the 17-gon. As the announcement indicates, the
constructability of the 17-gon is merely a corollary of a much deeper
principle--the generation of magnitudes of higher powers, as that
principle was understood by Plato, Cusa, Kepler, Fermat, Leibniz and the
Bernoulli's. As with his contemporaneous work on the fundamental theorem
of algebra, Gauss' approach was explicitly anti-deductive, discovering a
common physical principle that underlay both geometry and number. It was
also a direct confrontation with the failed Aristotelean methods of the
likes of Euler and Lagrange who understood the circle as an object in
visible space and numbers as abstract formalisms.

Today's pedagogical exercise is the first of two, intended to guide the
reader through the relevant concepts of Gauss' method. It will require
some "heavy lifting" and the reader is advised to work it through all
the way to the end, no matter how arduous it seems along the way, and
then look back, surveying what has been gained from the vantage point of
the summit. The reader is also advised to review the preliminary work on
Gauss' theory of the division of the circle that was the subject of the
several past pedagogicals, as it was summarized in the Winter 2001-2002
edition of 21st Century Science and Techonlogy, and the pedagogical
exercises on the residues of powers (Riemann for Anti-Dummies Parts
20-25.) (Reference will also be made to several figures)

**Polygons As Powers**

As Gauss' announcement indicates, by Euclid's time, geometers had
succeeded in finding the magnitudes that divided a circle in certain
ways. What was not so evident, was why those ways and not others? From
the standpoint of sense certainty, the circle, like the line, appears
uniform and everywhere the same. Why then, is it not, like the line,
divisible into whatever number of parts one desires? What unseen
principle is determining which divisions are possible, and which are
not?

Yet, when the circle is considered as a unit of action in the complex
domain, it becomes evident that the division of the circle is based on
the principle that generates magnitudes of successively higher powers.
Those who have worked through the pedagogical exercises on Gauss' 1799
doctoral dissertation are familiar with how this works. There we saw
that algebraic powers are generated by a non-algebraic, physical
principle, as expressed, for example, by the catenary. This principle
belongs to the domain of functions that Leibniz called transcendentala,
and is expressed mathematically by the equiangular spiral, or
alternatively, the exponential (logarithmic) functions. Gauss showed
that these transcendental functions were themselves part of a higher
class of functions that could only be adequately known through images in
the complex domain.

From this standpoint, the generation of magnitudes of any algebraic
power correspond to an angular change within an equiangular spiral.
"Squaring" is the action associated with doubling the angle within an
equiangular spiral, "cubing" by tripling, fourth power by quadrupling,
and so forth. These angular changes are, consequently, what generates
magnitudes of succesively higher algebraic powers. When the circle is
correctly understood as merely a special case of an equiangular spiral,
the generation of algebraic powers is reflected as a mapping of one
circle onto another. Squaring, for example, maps one circle onto another
twice, cubing maps three times, and so on for the higher powers. (The
reader is referred to the figures from the pedagogical discussions on
the fundamental theorem of algebra.)

The regular divisions of the circle are simply the inversion of this
action. Each rotation around the "squared" circle divides the original
circle in half. Each rotation around the "cubed" circle divides the
original circle into thirds, each rotation around the fourth power
circle, divides the original circle into fourths, and so on.
Consequently, the vertices of a regular polygon, are the points on the
original circle, that correspond to the complete rotations around the
"powered" circle and the number of vertices corresponds to the degree of
the power. For example, the fifth power will produce, by inversion, the
five vertices of the pentagon; the inversion of the seventh power, will
produce the seven vertices of the heptagon, etc. All the vertices of a
given polygon are generated, "all at once", so to speak, by one
function, which is the inversion of the function that generates the
corresponding power. (By Gauss' time, such inversions had come to be
called "roots", not to be confused with the misapplication of that term
by ignorant translators of Plato's word, "dunamis".) Herein lies the
paradox. If the triangle, square and pentagon are inversions of the
generation of third, fourth, and fifth powers respectively, how come
they are constructable and other polygons are not? (Constructable is
used here in the same sense as Kepler uses the term "knowable" in the
first book of the Harmonies of the World. By "knowable", Kepler meant
those magnitudes that were commensurate with the diameter of the circle,
part of the diameter, or the square of the diameter or its part. These
magnitudes are the only magnitudes, "constructable" from the circle and
its diameter, or by straight-edge and compass. All such magnitudes
correspond to "square roots" or magnitudes of the second power.
Magnitudes of higher powers, are not "knowable" from the circle alone,
as is evident from the problem of doubling the cube, or trisecting the
angle.)

**Prime Numbers are Ones**

It was Gauss' insight to recognize that the solution to this paradox
lay, not in the visible circle, but in the nature of prime numbers. To
begin with, throw out the common formal definition of prime numbers, and
consider a physical principle in which prime numbers arise. This can be
most efficiently illustrated by example. Perform the following
experiment: draw 10 dots, in a roughly circular configuration, and
number them 0 to 9. Connect the 10 dots sequentially (0, 1, 2,...) and
call that sequence 1. Now connect every other dot, (0, 2, 4, 6...) and
call that action sequence 2. Then every third dot, (0, 3, 6, 9, ..., for
sequence 3) then every fourth dot, (0, 4, 8, ..., sequence 4) and so on.

Notice, that some sequences succeeded in connecting all 10 dots, namely,
sequences 1, 3, 7 and 9, while sequences 2, 4, 5, and 8 connected only
some of the dots. In the case of the latter, sequences, 2 and 5 became
completed actions within one rotation, whereas 4 and 8 did not become
completed actions until after more than one rotation.

Numbers are not formal symbols (or objects), to be manipulated according
to a set of formal rules, but are relationships arising from physical
action. In the above example, the number 10 becomes a One, or, as Gauss
called it, a modulus. The numbers 1 through 9 are types of actions, not
collections of things. With respect to modulus 10, the numbers (actions)
1, 3, 7, and 9 are called relatively prime, because those actions do not
divide the modulus. The numbers 2, and 5, are called factors of 10,
because those actions do divide the modulus within one rotation. (The
numbers 4 and 8, divide the modulus but not within one rotation because
they are not factors themselves but they share a common factor (namely
2) with 10.)

These relationships, of factors and relative primeness, are determined
only by the nature of the modulus. If you begin sequence 2 on dot #1
instead of dot #0, it still connects only 5 dots. Similarly, if you
begin sequence 3 on dot #1, it will still be relatively prime to 10.
Additionally, if you continue the experiment with sequences 11, 12, 13,
etc., the results will be identical to the sequences 1, 2, 3, etc.
except that one rotation will be added. Gauss called these numbers
congruent relative to modulus 10.

Thus, the modulus defines certain relationships, relative to the entire
universe of whole numbers, in which some numbers are factors, some
numbers are relatively prime, and some numbers are not factors
themselves, but contain factors of the modulus.

However, when one dot is added, and the same experiment is performed
with respect to 11 dots, all the sequences connect all the dots. Thus,
11 has no factors and all numbers are relatively prime to it. The
relationship of modulus 11 to the entire universe of whole numbers is
quite different than the modulus 10.

The modulus is the One. Some moduli, such as 10, define some numbers as
factors,and some numbers as relatively prime and are called "composite".
Those moduli under which all numbers are prime, are known as prime
numbers.

There is nothing absolute about the quality of primeness. Relatively
prime numbers gain this characteristic relative to a one (modulus).
Those numbers that are prime relative to the One, are absolutely prime.
(Gauss, in his treatises on bi-quadratic residues, would later show that
even this characteristic of absolute primeness is not really absolute
but relative to a still higher principle.)

**Polygons as Planetary Systems**

This leads us back to the original paradox. If the prime numbers are
irreducible Ones, how come some prime number divisions of the circle are
constructable and others not?

Take another look at the image of a circle in the complex domain. The
vertices of a regular polygon are the roots (inversions) of a
corresponding power. This relationship of "roots" and "powers" produces
a type of harmonic "planetary system" for each polygon in which only
those "planetary orbits" that correspond to the "roots" of that "power"
are possible, and, these "roots" have a unique harmonic relationship to
each other, whose characteristics are determined by the number-theoretic
characteristics of the prime number.

Illustrate this pedagogically by an example. The vertices of a regular
pentagon are the five "roots" of 1 and each of these "roots" is a
complex number that has the power to produce a fifth degree magnitude.
Such complex numbers represented the combined action of rotation and
extension. Since in a circle the extension is constant, the complex
numbers are at the endpoints of equally spaced radii. To construct the
polygon it is necessary to determine the positions of these radii. To do
this Gauss used the method of inversion and determined the positions of
the radii from the harmonic relations among them. Even without knowing
the positions of the radii, the harmonic relations can be known because
the radii are inversions (roots) of powers. In other words, the vertices
of the polygon are the endpoints of equally spaced radii.

But don't look at the endpoints (visible objects). Look for why the
radii are equally spaced. They are equally spaced because they are the
roots of an algebraic power. To illustrate this use the pentagon as an
example, draw a circle with five approximately equally spaced radii.
This should look like an "inside out" pentagon. (Since we are
investigating only the relationships among the radii at this point it is
not necessary that the radii be exactly equally spaced.)

Label the endpoints of the radii 1, a, b, c, d, with "a" representing
1/5 of a rotation, "b", 2/5, "c", 3/5, "d", 4/5 and "1" being 1 full
rotation. If any of these individual angular actions is repeated
(multiplied) five times, the resulting action will end up at 1. In other
words, a ^5^ , b ^5^ , c ^5^ and d ^5^ are all equal to 1. Furthermore,
a ^0^ =1, a ^1^ =a, a ^2^ =b, a ^3^ =c, a ^4^ =d; b ^0^ =1, b ^1^ =b, b
^2^ =d, b ^3^ =a, b ^4^ =c; c ^0^ =1, c ^1^ =c, c ^2^ =a,c ^3^ =d, c ^4^
=b; d ^0^ =1, d ^1^ =d, d ^2^ =c, d ^3^ =b, d ^4^ =a. Thus, any vertex
can generate all the others. (For the general case, each of the vertices
corresponds to a complex number of the form a + b ?-1, such that (a +
b?-1) ^n^ =1 for all "n's" of an "n" sided polygon.)

In the example of the pentagon, five is the modulus, the One, which
establishes a certain harmonic ordering under which there are five and
only five "orbits". A different modulus would produce a different number
of "orbits", but the relationship just illustrated will remain; only the
number of "orbits" will have changed, and consequently, the nature of
the harmonies. Notice the congruence of these actions with our earlier
experiment with dots illustrating the physical principle from which
primeness, relative primeness and factors arise. Notice the similarity
between the power sequences generated from each complex root, and the
different number sequences used to connect the dots. This congruence is
not discovered by looking at the visible objects, but by a method
Leibniz called, "Geometry of Position", or "analysis situs", or what
Gauss called, "geometrica situs". It reflects a higher principle,
independent of any particular number and begins to shed light on that
"profound connection" Gauss discovered between the geometry of
transcendental functions and higher Arithmetic.

Next week we'll look further into that connection.
:::

::: {.addtoany_share_save_container .addtoany_content_bottom}
::: {.a2a_kit .a2a_kit_size_32 .addtoany_list a2a-url="http://lymcanada.org/30/" a2a-title="Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part  30 :  The Powers of One"}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F30%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%20%2030%20%3A%20%20The%20Powers%20of%20One "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F30%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%20%2030%20%3A%20%20The%20Powers%20of%20One "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/google_plus?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F30%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%20%2030%20%3A%20%20The%20Powers%20of%20One "Google+"){.a2a_button_google_plus}
[](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd .addtoany_share_save}
:::
:::
:::

[ [ Posted on ]{.screen-reader-text} [February 20, 2010 December 30,
2014](http://lymcanada.org/30/) ]{.posted-on} [ [ [ Author
]{.screen-reader-text} [Bruce
Director](http://lymcanada.org/author/bdirector/){.url .fn .n} ]{.author
.vcard} ]{.byline} [ [ Categories ]{.screen-reader-text}
[EN](http://lymcanada.org/category/en/) , [Riemann for
Anti-Dummies](http://lymcanada.org/category/science-1/c132-riemann-for-anti-dummies/)
]{.cat-links}
