::: entry-header
# Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 32 : The Beginnings of Differential Geometry {#riemann-for-anti-dummies-part-32-the-beginnings-of-differential-geometry .entry-title}
:::

::: entry-content
::: pf-content
::: {align="center"}
**Riemann for Anti-Dummies Part 32**
:::

THE BEGINNINGS OF DIFFERENTIAL GEOMETRY

Fifty-two years after Gauss' 1799 doctoral dissertation on the
fundamental theorem of algebra, his student, Bernhard Riemann,
submitted, to Gauss, an equally revolutionary doctoral dissertation that
took Gauss' initial discovery into a new, higher, domain. Riemann's
thesis, "Foundations for a general theory of functions of a single
variable complex magnitude", built on the foundations of Gauss' own
work, established a complete generalization of the principles of
physical differential geometry that was set into motion by Kepler nearly
250 years earlier.

It is beneficial, and perhaps essential, as a preliminary to a more
detailed discussion of Riemann's work itself, to review three exemplary
discoveries of physical principles, that taken together, trace the
historical development of the ideas leading into Riemann's work:
Kepler's principles of planetary motion; the Leibniz-Bernoulli discovery
of the principle of the catenary; and Gauss' own work in geodesy. All
three, while seemingly diverse, are in fact intimately connected. They
all deal, in one way or another, with investigations into the nature of
universal gravitation, and, taken together, they comprise a succession
of concepts of increasing generality and power.

Begin first with Kepler. Taken in its entirety, from the Mysterium
Cosmographicum to the Harmonice Mundi, Kepler's work demonstrates that
the action governing any planet at any moment is a function of the
principle that organizes the solar system as a whole; the principle of
universal gravitation. Kepler discovered that this principle has an
harmonic characteristic, which determines that the planetary orbits are
elliptical, not circular. The unique shape of each individual elliptical
orbit is determined, not by each planet alone, nor by the pair-wise
interaction of that planet with the Sun, but by the harmonic
relationship among the maximum and minimum speeds of all the planets. In
other words, the action of the planet at any moment is determined by
these extremes, between which, the planet's orbit "hangs". The
magnitudes of these "hanging points", are not arbitrary, but when taken
all together, conform, approximately, to the harmonic ordering of the
musical scale.

The eccentricity of the planetary orbits posed a challenge to Kepler
because he had no mathematical means to determine the exact position,
direction and velocity of each planet at every moment, so he demanded
the invention of a new mathematics. Kepler prescribed that such a
mathematics must be able to determine how the harmonic principle that
determines the planet's extremes, is expressed, throughout the entire
orbit, and he took the first steps toward developing that mathematics.
(See Riemann for Anti-Dummies Parts 1-6)

Responding to Kepler's demand, Leibniz and his collaborator, Johann
Bernoulli developed the calculus, the most general expression of which
is demonstrated by their joint effort on the catenary. At first glance,
the catenary appears similar, in principle, to a planetary orbit, in
that the shape of the curve seems to be determined by the position of
the points from which chain hangs. As the position of these "hanging
points" changes, the chain re-orients itself, so that its overall shape
is maintained. In this respect, the relationship of these hanging points
to all the other points on the catenary, initially seems analogous to
the relationship between the extreme speeds of a planet to the entire
orbit. But, as Bernoulli showed in his book on the integral calculus,
all points on the catenary, except the lowest point, are, at all times,
hanging points. (The reader should review Riemann for Anti-Dummies Parts
10 "Justice for the Catenary", and chapter 4 of "How Gauss Determined
the Orbit of Ceres", to perform the experiments indicated therein.(fn.
1.)) This is, in fact, an inversion of the principle expressed in
Keplerian orbits. In the case of the planet, the orbit, "hangs" between
its two extremes. For the catenary, the extreme, that is the lowest
point, is the one point that does no hanging. (In Cusa's terms it is the
point that is simultaneously motion and no-motion.) Applying Leibniz'
calculus, Bernoulli demonstrated how the catenary is "unfolded" from
this lowest point. (fn. 2.)

Leibniz, in turn, demonstrated that this physical principle also
reflected the characteristic exhibited by the logarithmic (exponential)
function. (See Leibniz paper on catenary.) Thus, the hanging chain is
characterized by the same transcendental principle that subsumes the
generation of the so-called algebraic powers, and which is exhibited in
other physical processes such as biological growth and the musical
scale, as well. Consequently, the characteristics of the logarithmic
(exponential) function, is an expression of a physical principle, not a
mathematical one.

Now, compare the above described examples with Gauss' discovery of the
Geoid. From 1818 to 1832 Gauss carried out a geodetic survey of the
Kingdom of Hannover. This involved determining the physical distances
along the surface of the Earth by laying out triangles and measuring the
angles formed by the "line of sight" sides. The paradox Gauss confronted
was that the relationship between the lengths of the sides of the
triangles and the angles, is a function of the shape of the Earth.
(fn.3.) However, the shape of the Earth could not be known in advance of
the measurements. The problem was further complicated by the fact that
all the measurements were taken with respect to the direction of the
pull of gravity, as determined by the direction of a hanging plumb bob.
Like the relationship between the angles of a triangle and the lengths
of the sides, the direction of the pull of gravity depends on the shape
of the Earth. For example, if the Earth were spherical, the plumb bob
would always point toward the center of the Earth. If the Earth were
ellipsoidal, the plumb bob would point to different places, depending on
where on the ellipsoid the measurement was being taken. Gauss showed
that the problem was even more complicated, because the Earth's shape
was very irregular. (See Riemann for Anti-Dummies Part 17.)

Here Gauss was confronted with exactly the same type of problem as
Kepler and Leibniz before him. Existing mathematics could not measure
such an irregular shape. All previous approaches began with an a priori
assumption of the shape of the Earth, one that conformed to existing
mathematical knowledge. (This brings to mind Gallileo's foolish
insistence that the catenary was a parabola because that was the shape
in the mathematical textbooks which looked most like a catenary. The
chain, however, did not read Gallileo's preferred texts.) Gauss
abandoned all such attempts to fit the Earth into an assumed shape,
declaring that the geometrical shape of the Earth is that shape that is
everywhere perpendicular to the pull of gravity. In other words, instead
of assuming an imaginary shape, and measuring the real Earth as a
deviation from the imaginary one, Gauss rejected the fantasy world
altogether. (Something more and more people should want to do these days
as the global monetary systems disintegrates.) The physically determined
shape that Gauss measured has since become known as the Geoid.

While the Geoid is an irregular surface, its irregularity is "tuned" so
to speak by the motion of the Earth on its axis. Like the planetary
orbit, or the hanging chain, that motion determines the positions of
two, "hanging points", specifically the north and south pole, from which
the Geoid hangs.

However, since the Geoid is a surface, it has a different relationship
to its poles, than the planetary orbit to its extremes, or the catenary
to the lowest point. The latter two cases express the relationship
between singularities and action on a curve. The former expresses the
relationship between singularities and action on a surface, from which
the action along the curves is derived.

The problem Gauss confronted was that since the physical triangles he
measured on the surface of the Geoid were irregular, how could the
lengths of the sides be determined from the angles, without first
knowing the relationship between the lengths and the angles, i.e., the
shape of the surface? To solve the problem, Gauss recognized that since
all his measurements were angles, he could free himself from having to
assume the Earth's shape before he could determine his measurements, if
he could project these angles from one surface to another, for example,
from the geoid, to an ellipsoid, to a sphere and back again. Like Kepler
and Leibniz, Gauss could not do this within the existing mathematics. So
he invented a new one.

Gauss described the beginnings of this new mathematics in several
locations, most notably his 1822 memoir on the subject of conformal
mapping, that was awarded a prize from the Royal Society of Sciences of
Copenhagen. Riemann relied heavily on this paper for the foundations of
his own doctoral dissertation.

Conformal mapping is a term, invented by Gauss, to refer to
transformations from one surface to another in which the angles between
any curves on that surfaces are preserved. In his memoir, Gauss
described conformal mapping as a transformation where, "the lengths of
all indefinitely short lines extending from a point in the second
surface and contained therein shall be proportional to the lengths of
the corresponding lines in the first surface, and secondly, that every
angle made between these intersecting lines in the first surface shall
be equal to the angle between the corresponding lines in the second
surface."

To get an idea of what this means, perform the following experiment.
Take a clear plastic hemisphere and draw a spherical triangle on it with
heavy black lines. Go into a dark room and, using a flashlight, project
the triangle onto the wall. If you hold the flashlight at the center of
the hemisphere, the curved lines of the spherical triangle will be
transformed into straight lines. If you then move the flashlight from
the center of the hemisphere to a pole, the projected straight lines
will become curved again, and the angles between them will be equal to
the angles between the sides of the original triangle on the hemisphere.

To discover experimentally the difference between these two projections,
tape cardboard circles of differing sizes onto the plastic hemisphere.
(The circles should vary from quite large to quite small.) Now perform
the same projection with the flashlight as before. When the flashlight
is at the center of the hemisphere, these circles project to ellipses.
When the flashlight is at the pole of the hemisphere, the circles become
more circular, with the smaller circles become more circular than the
larger ones. In the first case, the transformation of the circles into
ellipses indicates that the proportion by which figures are transformed
changes depending on the direction of the transformation with respect to
the poles. The second case shows that the transformations are
proportional in all directions.

Thus, the conformal mapping of one surface to another involves a change
in rotation and direction. Having done the work on Gauss' fundamental
theorem of algebra, you should be able to recognize, as Gauss did, that
this type of change could only be represented in the complex domain,
which is where we will begin next time.

FOOTNOTES

1\. Any two points on opposite sides of the lowest point hold up the
weight of the chain hanging between them. The force required to hold up
this weight is proportional to the sines of the angles made by the
tangents to the catenary at this point, and a vertical line rising from
the point at which the tangents intersect.

2\. The reader is urged to preform the experiment described in the
indicated NF article. Take a string and tie a weight in the middle of
it. Hold the ends of the string in each hand and let the weight hang
between them. As you move your hands apart, the tension you feel on your
hands will increase. If you begin with your hands close together, the
tension is relatively small. As you pull your hands apart, the tension
increases, slowly at first, but the rate of increase in the tension
grows, the farther apart your hands are to one another. Now try to move
your hands apart, while the string slides between your fingers, so that
the string on one side remains horizontal. The other hand will move in
the shape of the catenary.

3\. The reader can grasp this by comparing triangles drawn on a piece of
paper, a sphere and an irregular shaped surface, such as a watermelon.
:::

::: {.addtoany_share_save_container .addtoany_content_bottom}
::: {.a2a_kit .a2a_kit_size_32 .addtoany_list a2a-url="http://lymcanada.org/32/" a2a-title="Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 32 :  The Beginnings of Differential Geometry"}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F32%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2032%20%3A%20%20The%20Beginnings%20of%20Differential%20Geometry "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F32%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2032%20%3A%20%20The%20Beginnings%20of%20Differential%20Geometry "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/google_plus?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F32%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2032%20%3A%20%20The%20Beginnings%20of%20Differential%20Geometry "Google+"){.a2a_button_google_plus}
[](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd .addtoany_share_save}
:::
:::
:::

[ [ Posted on ]{.screen-reader-text} [February 20, 2010 December 30,
2014](http://lymcanada.org/32/) ]{.posted-on} [ [ [ Author
]{.screen-reader-text} [Bruce
Director](http://lymcanada.org/author/bdirector/){.url .fn .n} ]{.author
.vcard} ]{.byline} [ [ Categories ]{.screen-reader-text}
[EN](http://lymcanada.org/category/en/) , [Riemann for
Anti-Dummies](http://lymcanada.org/category/science-1/c132-riemann-for-anti-dummies/)
]{.cat-links}

::: entry-header
# Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 32 : The Beginnings of Differential Geometry {#riemann-for-anti-dummies-part-32-the-beginnings-of-differential-geometry-1 .entry-title}
:::

::: entry-content
::: pf-content
::: {align="center"}
**Riemann for Anti-Dummies Part 32**
:::

THE BEGINNINGS OF DIFFERENTIAL GEOMETRY

Fifty-two years after Gauss' 1799 doctoral dissertation on the
fundamental theorem of algebra, his student, Bernhard Riemann,
submitted, to Gauss, an equally revolutionary doctoral dissertation that
took Gauss' initial discovery into a new, higher, domain. Riemann's
thesis, "Foundations for a general theory of functions of a single
variable complex magnitude", built on the foundations of Gauss' own
work, established a complete generalization of the principles of
physical differential geometry that was set into motion by Kepler nearly
250 years earlier.

It is beneficial, and perhaps essential, as a preliminary to a more
detailed discussion of Riemann's work itself, to review three exemplary
discoveries of physical principles, that taken together, trace the
historical development of the ideas leading into Riemann's work:
Kepler's principles of planetary motion; the Leibniz-Bernoulli discovery
of the principle of the catenary; and Gauss' own work in geodesy. All
three, while seemingly diverse, are in fact intimately connected. They
all deal, in one way or another, with investigations into the nature of
universal gravitation, and, taken together, they comprise a succession
of concepts of increasing generality and power.

Begin first with Kepler. Taken in its entirety, from the Mysterium
Cosmographicum to the Harmonice Mundi, Kepler's work demonstrates that
the action governing any planet at any moment is a function of the
principle that organizes the solar system as a whole; the principle of
universal gravitation. Kepler discovered that this principle has an
harmonic characteristic, which determines that the planetary orbits are
elliptical, not circular. The unique shape of each individual elliptical
orbit is determined, not by each planet alone, nor by the pair-wise
interaction of that planet with the Sun, but by the harmonic
relationship among the maximum and minimum speeds of all the planets. In
other words, the action of the planet at any moment is determined by
these extremes, between which, the planet's orbit "hangs". The
magnitudes of these "hanging points", are not arbitrary, but when taken
all together, conform, approximately, to the harmonic ordering of the
musical scale.

The eccentricity of the planetary orbits posed a challenge to Kepler
because he had no mathematical means to determine the exact position,
direction and velocity of each planet at every moment, so he demanded
the invention of a new mathematics. Kepler prescribed that such a
mathematics must be able to determine how the harmonic principle that
determines the planet's extremes, is expressed, throughout the entire
orbit, and he took the first steps toward developing that mathematics.
(See Riemann for Anti-Dummies Parts 1-6)

Responding to Kepler's demand, Leibniz and his collaborator, Johann
Bernoulli developed the calculus, the most general expression of which
is demonstrated by their joint effort on the catenary. At first glance,
the catenary appears similar, in principle, to a planetary orbit, in
that the shape of the curve seems to be determined by the position of
the points from which chain hangs. As the position of these "hanging
points" changes, the chain re-orients itself, so that its overall shape
is maintained. In this respect, the relationship of these hanging points
to all the other points on the catenary, initially seems analogous to
the relationship between the extreme speeds of a planet to the entire
orbit. But, as Bernoulli showed in his book on the integral calculus,
all points on the catenary, except the lowest point, are, at all times,
hanging points. (The reader should review Riemann for Anti-Dummies Parts
10 "Justice for the Catenary", and chapter 4 of "How Gauss Determined
the Orbit of Ceres", to perform the experiments indicated therein.(fn.
1.)) This is, in fact, an inversion of the principle expressed in
Keplerian orbits. In the case of the planet, the orbit, "hangs" between
its two extremes. For the catenary, the extreme, that is the lowest
point, is the one point that does no hanging. (In Cusa's terms it is the
point that is simultaneously motion and no-motion.) Applying Leibniz'
calculus, Bernoulli demonstrated how the catenary is "unfolded" from
this lowest point. (fn. 2.)

Leibniz, in turn, demonstrated that this physical principle also
reflected the characteristic exhibited by the logarithmic (exponential)
function. (See Leibniz paper on catenary.) Thus, the hanging chain is
characterized by the same transcendental principle that subsumes the
generation of the so-called algebraic powers, and which is exhibited in
other physical processes such as biological growth and the musical
scale, as well. Consequently, the characteristics of the logarithmic
(exponential) function, is an expression of a physical principle, not a
mathematical one.

Now, compare the above described examples with Gauss' discovery of the
Geoid. From 1818 to 1832 Gauss carried out a geodetic survey of the
Kingdom of Hannover. This involved determining the physical distances
along the surface of the Earth by laying out triangles and measuring the
angles formed by the "line of sight" sides. The paradox Gauss confronted
was that the relationship between the lengths of the sides of the
triangles and the angles, is a function of the shape of the Earth.
(fn.3.) However, the shape of the Earth could not be known in advance of
the measurements. The problem was further complicated by the fact that
all the measurements were taken with respect to the direction of the
pull of gravity, as determined by the direction of a hanging plumb bob.
Like the relationship between the angles of a triangle and the lengths
of the sides, the direction of the pull of gravity depends on the shape
of the Earth. For example, if the Earth were spherical, the plumb bob
would always point toward the center of the Earth. If the Earth were
ellipsoidal, the plumb bob would point to different places, depending on
where on the ellipsoid the measurement was being taken. Gauss showed
that the problem was even more complicated, because the Earth's shape
was very irregular. (See Riemann for Anti-Dummies Part 17.)

Here Gauss was confronted with exactly the same type of problem as
Kepler and Leibniz before him. Existing mathematics could not measure
such an irregular shape. All previous approaches began with an a priori
assumption of the shape of the Earth, one that conformed to existing
mathematical knowledge. (This brings to mind Gallileo's foolish
insistence that the catenary was a parabola because that was the shape
in the mathematical textbooks which looked most like a catenary. The
chain, however, did not read Gallileo's preferred texts.) Gauss
abandoned all such attempts to fit the Earth into an assumed shape,
declaring that the geometrical shape of the Earth is that shape that is
everywhere perpendicular to the pull of gravity. In other words, instead
of assuming an imaginary shape, and measuring the real Earth as a
deviation from the imaginary one, Gauss rejected the fantasy world
altogether. (Something more and more people should want to do these days
as the global monetary systems disintegrates.) The physically determined
shape that Gauss measured has since become known as the Geoid.

While the Geoid is an irregular surface, its irregularity is "tuned" so
to speak by the motion of the Earth on its axis. Like the planetary
orbit, or the hanging chain, that motion determines the positions of
two, "hanging points", specifically the north and south pole, from which
the Geoid hangs.

However, since the Geoid is a surface, it has a different relationship
to its poles, than the planetary orbit to its extremes, or the catenary
to the lowest point. The latter two cases express the relationship
between singularities and action on a curve. The former expresses the
relationship between singularities and action on a surface, from which
the action along the curves is derived.

The problem Gauss confronted was that since the physical triangles he
measured on the surface of the Geoid were irregular, how could the
lengths of the sides be determined from the angles, without first
knowing the relationship between the lengths and the angles, i.e., the
shape of the surface? To solve the problem, Gauss recognized that since
all his measurements were angles, he could free himself from having to
assume the Earth's shape before he could determine his measurements, if
he could project these angles from one surface to another, for example,
from the geoid, to an ellipsoid, to a sphere and back again. Like Kepler
and Leibniz, Gauss could not do this within the existing mathematics. So
he invented a new one.

Gauss described the beginnings of this new mathematics in several
locations, most notably his 1822 memoir on the subject of conformal
mapping, that was awarded a prize from the Royal Society of Sciences of
Copenhagen. Riemann relied heavily on this paper for the foundations of
his own doctoral dissertation.

Conformal mapping is a term, invented by Gauss, to refer to
transformations from one surface to another in which the angles between
any curves on that surfaces are preserved. In his memoir, Gauss
described conformal mapping as a transformation where, "the lengths of
all indefinitely short lines extending from a point in the second
surface and contained therein shall be proportional to the lengths of
the corresponding lines in the first surface, and secondly, that every
angle made between these intersecting lines in the first surface shall
be equal to the angle between the corresponding lines in the second
surface."

To get an idea of what this means, perform the following experiment.
Take a clear plastic hemisphere and draw a spherical triangle on it with
heavy black lines. Go into a dark room and, using a flashlight, project
the triangle onto the wall. If you hold the flashlight at the center of
the hemisphere, the curved lines of the spherical triangle will be
transformed into straight lines. If you then move the flashlight from
the center of the hemisphere to a pole, the projected straight lines
will become curved again, and the angles between them will be equal to
the angles between the sides of the original triangle on the hemisphere.

To discover experimentally the difference between these two projections,
tape cardboard circles of differing sizes onto the plastic hemisphere.
(The circles should vary from quite large to quite small.) Now perform
the same projection with the flashlight as before. When the flashlight
is at the center of the hemisphere, these circles project to ellipses.
When the flashlight is at the pole of the hemisphere, the circles become
more circular, with the smaller circles become more circular than the
larger ones. In the first case, the transformation of the circles into
ellipses indicates that the proportion by which figures are transformed
changes depending on the direction of the transformation with respect to
the poles. The second case shows that the transformations are
proportional in all directions.

Thus, the conformal mapping of one surface to another involves a change
in rotation and direction. Having done the work on Gauss' fundamental
theorem of algebra, you should be able to recognize, as Gauss did, that
this type of change could only be represented in the complex domain,
which is where we will begin next time.

FOOTNOTES

1\. Any two points on opposite sides of the lowest point hold up the
weight of the chain hanging between them. The force required to hold up
this weight is proportional to the sines of the angles made by the
tangents to the catenary at this point, and a vertical line rising from
the point at which the tangents intersect.

2\. The reader is urged to preform the experiment described in the
indicated NF article. Take a string and tie a weight in the middle of
it. Hold the ends of the string in each hand and let the weight hang
between them. As you move your hands apart, the tension you feel on your
hands will increase. If you begin with your hands close together, the
tension is relatively small. As you pull your hands apart, the tension
increases, slowly at first, but the rate of increase in the tension
grows, the farther apart your hands are to one another. Now try to move
your hands apart, while the string slides between your fingers, so that
the string on one side remains horizontal. The other hand will move in
the shape of the catenary.

3\. The reader can grasp this by comparing triangles drawn on a piece of
paper, a sphere and an irregular shaped surface, such as a watermelon.
:::

::: {.addtoany_share_save_container .addtoany_content_bottom}
::: {.a2a_kit .a2a_kit_size_32 .addtoany_list a2a-url="http://lymcanada.org/32/" a2a-title="Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 32 :  The Beginnings of Differential Geometry"}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F32%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2032%20%3A%20%20The%20Beginnings%20of%20Differential%20Geometry "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F32%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2032%20%3A%20%20The%20Beginnings%20of%20Differential%20Geometry "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/google_plus?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F32%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2032%20%3A%20%20The%20Beginnings%20of%20Differential%20Geometry "Google+"){.a2a_button_google_plus}
[](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd .addtoany_share_save}
:::
:::
:::

[ [ Posted on ]{.screen-reader-text} [February 20, 2010 December 30,
2014](http://lymcanada.org/32/) ]{.posted-on} [ [ [ Author
]{.screen-reader-text} [Bruce
Director](http://lymcanada.org/author/bdirector/){.url .fn .n} ]{.author
.vcard} ]{.byline} [ [ Categories ]{.screen-reader-text}
[EN](http://lymcanada.org/category/en/) , [Riemann for
Anti-Dummies](http://lymcanada.org/category/science-1/c132-riemann-for-anti-dummies/)
]{.cat-links}
