::: entry-header
# Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 34 : Power and Curvature {#riemann-for-anti-dummies-part-34-power-and-curvature .entry-title}
:::

::: entry-content
::: pf-content
::: {align="center"}
**Riemann for Anti-Dummies Part 34**
:::

POWER AND CURVATURE

In his 1854 habilitation lecture, Bernhard Riemann spoke of the twofold
task involved in lifting more than 2,000 years of darkness that had
settled on science:

"From Euclid to Legendre, to name the most renowned of modern writers on
geometry, this darkness has been lifted neither by the mathematicians
nor by the philosophers who have labored upon it. The reason of this lay
perhaps in the fact that the general concept of multiply extended
magnitudes, in which spatial magnitudes are comprehended, has not been
elaborated at all. Accordingly, I have proposed to myself at first the
problem of constructing the concept of a multiply extended magnitude out
of general notions of quantity. From this it will result that a multiply
extended magnitude is susceptible of various metric relations and that
space accordingly constitutes only a particular case of a
triply-extended magnitude. A necessary sequel of this is that the
propositions of geometry are not derivable from general concepts of
quantity, but those properties by which space is distinguished from
other conceivable triply-extended magnitudes can be gathered only by
experience. There arises from this the problem of searching out the
simplest facts by which the metric relations of space can be determined,
a problem which in the nature of things is not quite definite; for
several systems of simple facts can be stated which would suffice for
determining the metric relations of space; the most important for
present purposes is that laid down for foundations by Euclid. These
facts are, like all facts, not necessary but of a merely empirical
certainty; they are hypotheses...."

To grasp the significance of Riemann's "Plan of Investigation," it must
be recognized that the 2,000 years of darkness of which he spoke, was,
like the foundations of Euclidean geometry, not necessary. The Romantic
cult-belief that the definitions, axioms, and postulates of Euclid, were
the {a priori}, fixed, immutable and necessary condition of the
universe, never had any basis in truth. It was a false doctrine imposed
by an imperial system, which required the widespread acceptance of the
belief that the universe was ruled by forces beyond human comprehension
and control, and that these forces could only be administered by an
oligarchical authority. The edicts of this oligarchy, like the
definitions, axioms, and postulates of Euclidean geometry, were laid
down as given, not requiring, nor susceptible of, proof. They were
simply, "the way things are."

This view was expressed succinctly by the hoaxster, Claudius Ptolemy,
the hatchet-man who imposed the knowingly false, fixed, geocentric
conception of the solar system. Ptolemy, agreeing with Aristotle,
justified his attack on Aristarchus' provably true heliocentric
conception, as a necessary consequence of his view of Man. In the
introduction to his {Almagast}, Ptolemy stated that knowledge of both
God and the physical universe was impossible. The only knowledge
accessible to man was, what Ptolemy called "mathematical," that is,
knowledge which follows logically from a given set of axioms,
definitions, and postulates. Those axioms, definitions and postulates,
themselves can not be proven. As such, their authority resides not in
demonstrable truths, but in the arbitrary power of whoever decrees their
primacy. The evil lies not with the axioms, postulates, and definitions
themselves, but in the acceptance of the method that knowledge can be
derived only from them.

The popular acceptance of the darkness ushered in by the dominance of
this Aristotelean method was a tragic degeneration from a higher concept
of man and the universe developed in Classical Greece from Pythagoras
until the murder of Archimedes. Euclid's {Elements}, in a strange way,
demonstrate this themselves. Read in their customary order, the
{Elements} proceed from the definitions of point, line, surface, and
solid, as objects of, respectively, 0, 1, 2, and 3 "dimensions," and
certain postulates about the unlimitedness of these objects. From there,
a set of theorems is developed that elaborate the possible actions in a
universe that conforms to the restrictions contained in the opening
definitions, axioms, and postulates.

Yet read backwards, Euclid's {Elements} begin to reveal a completely
different comprehension of the universe. The {Elements} end where they
should begin--with the construction of the five regular (Platonic)
solids from the characteristic of spherical action. This investigation
leads to the discovery of magnitudes of different powers, as exhibited
in the problem of doubling the line, square, and cube. The relationships
among these powers, give rise to the proportions called the arithmetic,
geometric, and harmonic means, and to the prime numbers and the
relationships among them. Only then do the investigations concern the
reflection of these relationships in a plane. Only at the end, should we
arrive at the point, line, surface, and solid. Seen in this way, these
objects are concepts arising from a higher principle--the action that
produced the five regular solids from a sphere--not as objects created
by arbitrary decree from below, in the form of axioms, definitions, and
postulates.

(It is from this standpoint that Kepler begins his {Harmony of the
World} with a strong denunciation of Petrus Ramus, the leading
Aristotelean of the day, who sought to ban books 10 through 13 of
Euclid.)

This principle is similarly demonstrated by the Pythagorean/Platonic
investigations of doubling the line, square, and cube. As discussed in
previous pedagogicals, each object is generated by magnitudes of
successively higher powers. The relationship among these higher powers
is reflected by the arithmetic and geometric proportions. Initially, it
appears that each power is associated simply with an increase in
extension. For example, the magnitude that doubles the square is
incommensurable with the magnitude that doubles the line, but it is
produced from within the square. Yet, when the problem of doubling the
cube is considered, the sought-after magnitude is not generated anywhere
in the cube. Both the constructions of Archytus and Menaechmeus
demonstrate, that the magnitude that has the power to double the cube is
produced by the higher form of action represented by the cone, torus,
and cylinder. While that action has a causal effect on the generation of
cube, it is not produced anywhere in the cube. In other words, it is not
produced by an increase in extension from two to three "dimensions."

Another principle is involved. As emphasized in last week's pedagogical
discussion, the principle that generates the magnitude that doubles the
cube, is expressed in a change of "curvature."

As Riemann stated in his habilitation paper, the determination of
extension is only the first step:

"Now that the concept of an n-fold extended manifold has been
constructed and its essential mark has been found to be this, that the
determination of position therein can be referred to n determinations of
magnitude, there follows as second of the problems proposed above, an
investigation into the relations of measure that such a manifold is
susceptible of, also, into the conditions which suffice for determining
these metric relations."

To illustrate this pedagogically, perform the following experiment.
Stand in the corner of a room and mark one point on the ceiling above
your head, a second point on the wall directly to your right, and a
third point on the other wall directly to your left. Now, in your mind
connect these three points. If you point to these points in succession,
the motion of your arm will define three right angles, implying that
these three points all lie on the surface of a sphere. However, if you
connect these points, in your mind, with straight lines, the points now
lie on a flat surface, forming the triangular face of an octahedron. On
the other hand, if you connect the three points to one another by
hanging strings between them, the surface thus formed will be bounded by
catenaries, and thus be negatively curved. These three points form three
different triangles, which in all three cases, are doubly-extended
magnitudes. Yet, each is very different from the other. The difference
lies not in the degree of extension, but in the curvature of the surface
on which the triangle lies. Thus, the lines that form the sides of these
triangles, are defined by the nature of the surface in which they exist.
The Euclidean definition of a line as "breadthless length," cannot
distinguish the side of the spherical triangle from the flat or
negatively curved one; nor can the Euclidean definition of surface as,
"that which has length and breadth only," distinguish the three
triangles from one another.

The curvature of these three surfaces can be measured by the sum of the
angles of the triangles formed on each. On the spherical triangle, the
sum of the angles is greater than 180 degrees. On the flat one, the sum
of the angles is exactly 180 degrees. On the "catenary" triangle, the
sum of the angles is less than 180 degrees.

Now, think, as Gauss and Riemann did, of a manifold that encompasses all
three curvatures. Begin first with a positively curved surface such as a
sphere. Here the sum of the angles of a triangle is always greater than
180 degrees. The larger the triangle, the greater the sum, until a
maximum is reached when the triangle covers the whole sphere. As these
triangles become smaller, the sum of the angles approaches, but never
reaches 180 degrees, for when the sum of the angles reaches 180 degrees,
the surface becomes flat. On a negatively curved surface, just the
opposite occurs. As the triangle becomes smaller, the sum of the angles
of a triangle gets larger, approaching, but never reaching 180 degrees.

These three surfaces form a manifold of action, in which the flat plane
of Euclid is only the momentary transition between a negatively and a
positively curved surface.

Gauss saw in this the possibility of a physical determination of
geometry.

"It is easy to prove, that if Euclid's geometry is not true, there are
no similar figures. The angles of an equal-sided triangle, vary
according to the magnitude of the sides, which I do not at all find
absurd. It is thus, that angles are a function of the sides and the
sides are functions of the angles, and at the same time, a constant line
occurs naturally in such a function. It appears something of a paradox,
that a constant line could possibly exist, so to speak, {a priori}; but,
I find in it nothing contradictory. It were even desirable, that
Euclid's Geometry were not true, because then we would have, {a priori},
a universal measurement, for example, one could use for a unit of space
\[{Raumeinheit}\], the side of an equilateral triangle, whose angle is
59 degrees, 59 minutes, 59.99999... seconds."
:::

::: {.addtoany_share_save_container .addtoany_content_bottom}
::: {.a2a_kit .a2a_kit_size_32 .addtoany_list a2a-url="http://lymcanada.org/34/" a2a-title="Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 34 :  Power and Curvature"}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F34%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2034%20%3A%20%20Power%20and%20Curvature "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F34%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2034%20%3A%20%20Power%20and%20Curvature "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/google_plus?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F34%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2034%20%3A%20%20Power%20and%20Curvature "Google+"){.a2a_button_google_plus}
[](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd .addtoany_share_save}
:::
:::
:::

[ [ Posted on ]{.screen-reader-text} [February 20, 2010 December 30,
2014](http://lymcanada.org/34/) ]{.posted-on} [ [ [ Author
]{.screen-reader-text} [Bruce
Director](http://lymcanada.org/author/bdirector/){.url .fn .n} ]{.author
.vcard} ]{.byline} [ [ Categories ]{.screen-reader-text}
[EN](http://lymcanada.org/category/en/) , [Riemann for
Anti-Dummies](http://lymcanada.org/category/science-1/c132-riemann-for-anti-dummies/)
]{.cat-links}

::: entry-header
# Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 34 : Power and Curvature {#riemann-for-anti-dummies-part-34-power-and-curvature-1 .entry-title}
:::

::: entry-content
::: pf-content
::: {align="center"}
**Riemann for Anti-Dummies Part 34**
:::

POWER AND CURVATURE

In his 1854 habilitation lecture, Bernhard Riemann spoke of the twofold
task involved in lifting more than 2,000 years of darkness that had
settled on science:

"From Euclid to Legendre, to name the most renowned of modern writers on
geometry, this darkness has been lifted neither by the mathematicians
nor by the philosophers who have labored upon it. The reason of this lay
perhaps in the fact that the general concept of multiply extended
magnitudes, in which spatial magnitudes are comprehended, has not been
elaborated at all. Accordingly, I have proposed to myself at first the
problem of constructing the concept of a multiply extended magnitude out
of general notions of quantity. From this it will result that a multiply
extended magnitude is susceptible of various metric relations and that
space accordingly constitutes only a particular case of a
triply-extended magnitude. A necessary sequel of this is that the
propositions of geometry are not derivable from general concepts of
quantity, but those properties by which space is distinguished from
other conceivable triply-extended magnitudes can be gathered only by
experience. There arises from this the problem of searching out the
simplest facts by which the metric relations of space can be determined,
a problem which in the nature of things is not quite definite; for
several systems of simple facts can be stated which would suffice for
determining the metric relations of space; the most important for
present purposes is that laid down for foundations by Euclid. These
facts are, like all facts, not necessary but of a merely empirical
certainty; they are hypotheses...."

To grasp the significance of Riemann's "Plan of Investigation," it must
be recognized that the 2,000 years of darkness of which he spoke, was,
like the foundations of Euclidean geometry, not necessary. The Romantic
cult-belief that the definitions, axioms, and postulates of Euclid, were
the {a priori}, fixed, immutable and necessary condition of the
universe, never had any basis in truth. It was a false doctrine imposed
by an imperial system, which required the widespread acceptance of the
belief that the universe was ruled by forces beyond human comprehension
and control, and that these forces could only be administered by an
oligarchical authority. The edicts of this oligarchy, like the
definitions, axioms, and postulates of Euclidean geometry, were laid
down as given, not requiring, nor susceptible of, proof. They were
simply, "the way things are."

This view was expressed succinctly by the hoaxster, Claudius Ptolemy,
the hatchet-man who imposed the knowingly false, fixed, geocentric
conception of the solar system. Ptolemy, agreeing with Aristotle,
justified his attack on Aristarchus' provably true heliocentric
conception, as a necessary consequence of his view of Man. In the
introduction to his {Almagast}, Ptolemy stated that knowledge of both
God and the physical universe was impossible. The only knowledge
accessible to man was, what Ptolemy called "mathematical," that is,
knowledge which follows logically from a given set of axioms,
definitions, and postulates. Those axioms, definitions and postulates,
themselves can not be proven. As such, their authority resides not in
demonstrable truths, but in the arbitrary power of whoever decrees their
primacy. The evil lies not with the axioms, postulates, and definitions
themselves, but in the acceptance of the method that knowledge can be
derived only from them.

The popular acceptance of the darkness ushered in by the dominance of
this Aristotelean method was a tragic degeneration from a higher concept
of man and the universe developed in Classical Greece from Pythagoras
until the murder of Archimedes. Euclid's {Elements}, in a strange way,
demonstrate this themselves. Read in their customary order, the
{Elements} proceed from the definitions of point, line, surface, and
solid, as objects of, respectively, 0, 1, 2, and 3 "dimensions," and
certain postulates about the unlimitedness of these objects. From there,
a set of theorems is developed that elaborate the possible actions in a
universe that conforms to the restrictions contained in the opening
definitions, axioms, and postulates.

Yet read backwards, Euclid's {Elements} begin to reveal a completely
different comprehension of the universe. The {Elements} end where they
should begin--with the construction of the five regular (Platonic)
solids from the characteristic of spherical action. This investigation
leads to the discovery of magnitudes of different powers, as exhibited
in the problem of doubling the line, square, and cube. The relationships
among these powers, give rise to the proportions called the arithmetic,
geometric, and harmonic means, and to the prime numbers and the
relationships among them. Only then do the investigations concern the
reflection of these relationships in a plane. Only at the end, should we
arrive at the point, line, surface, and solid. Seen in this way, these
objects are concepts arising from a higher principle--the action that
produced the five regular solids from a sphere--not as objects created
by arbitrary decree from below, in the form of axioms, definitions, and
postulates.

(It is from this standpoint that Kepler begins his {Harmony of the
World} with a strong denunciation of Petrus Ramus, the leading
Aristotelean of the day, who sought to ban books 10 through 13 of
Euclid.)

This principle is similarly demonstrated by the Pythagorean/Platonic
investigations of doubling the line, square, and cube. As discussed in
previous pedagogicals, each object is generated by magnitudes of
successively higher powers. The relationship among these higher powers
is reflected by the arithmetic and geometric proportions. Initially, it
appears that each power is associated simply with an increase in
extension. For example, the magnitude that doubles the square is
incommensurable with the magnitude that doubles the line, but it is
produced from within the square. Yet, when the problem of doubling the
cube is considered, the sought-after magnitude is not generated anywhere
in the cube. Both the constructions of Archytus and Menaechmeus
demonstrate, that the magnitude that has the power to double the cube is
produced by the higher form of action represented by the cone, torus,
and cylinder. While that action has a causal effect on the generation of
cube, it is not produced anywhere in the cube. In other words, it is not
produced by an increase in extension from two to three "dimensions."

Another principle is involved. As emphasized in last week's pedagogical
discussion, the principle that generates the magnitude that doubles the
cube, is expressed in a change of "curvature."

As Riemann stated in his habilitation paper, the determination of
extension is only the first step:

"Now that the concept of an n-fold extended manifold has been
constructed and its essential mark has been found to be this, that the
determination of position therein can be referred to n determinations of
magnitude, there follows as second of the problems proposed above, an
investigation into the relations of measure that such a manifold is
susceptible of, also, into the conditions which suffice for determining
these metric relations."

To illustrate this pedagogically, perform the following experiment.
Stand in the corner of a room and mark one point on the ceiling above
your head, a second point on the wall directly to your right, and a
third point on the other wall directly to your left. Now, in your mind
connect these three points. If you point to these points in succession,
the motion of your arm will define three right angles, implying that
these three points all lie on the surface of a sphere. However, if you
connect these points, in your mind, with straight lines, the points now
lie on a flat surface, forming the triangular face of an octahedron. On
the other hand, if you connect the three points to one another by
hanging strings between them, the surface thus formed will be bounded by
catenaries, and thus be negatively curved. These three points form three
different triangles, which in all three cases, are doubly-extended
magnitudes. Yet, each is very different from the other. The difference
lies not in the degree of extension, but in the curvature of the surface
on which the triangle lies. Thus, the lines that form the sides of these
triangles, are defined by the nature of the surface in which they exist.
The Euclidean definition of a line as "breadthless length," cannot
distinguish the side of the spherical triangle from the flat or
negatively curved one; nor can the Euclidean definition of surface as,
"that which has length and breadth only," distinguish the three
triangles from one another.

The curvature of these three surfaces can be measured by the sum of the
angles of the triangles formed on each. On the spherical triangle, the
sum of the angles is greater than 180 degrees. On the flat one, the sum
of the angles is exactly 180 degrees. On the "catenary" triangle, the
sum of the angles is less than 180 degrees.

Now, think, as Gauss and Riemann did, of a manifold that encompasses all
three curvatures. Begin first with a positively curved surface such as a
sphere. Here the sum of the angles of a triangle is always greater than
180 degrees. The larger the triangle, the greater the sum, until a
maximum is reached when the triangle covers the whole sphere. As these
triangles become smaller, the sum of the angles approaches, but never
reaches 180 degrees, for when the sum of the angles reaches 180 degrees,
the surface becomes flat. On a negatively curved surface, just the
opposite occurs. As the triangle becomes smaller, the sum of the angles
of a triangle gets larger, approaching, but never reaching 180 degrees.

These three surfaces form a manifold of action, in which the flat plane
of Euclid is only the momentary transition between a negatively and a
positively curved surface.

Gauss saw in this the possibility of a physical determination of
geometry.

"It is easy to prove, that if Euclid's geometry is not true, there are
no similar figures. The angles of an equal-sided triangle, vary
according to the magnitude of the sides, which I do not at all find
absurd. It is thus, that angles are a function of the sides and the
sides are functions of the angles, and at the same time, a constant line
occurs naturally in such a function. It appears something of a paradox,
that a constant line could possibly exist, so to speak, {a priori}; but,
I find in it nothing contradictory. It were even desirable, that
Euclid's Geometry were not true, because then we would have, {a priori},
a universal measurement, for example, one could use for a unit of space
\[{Raumeinheit}\], the side of an equilateral triangle, whose angle is
59 degrees, 59 minutes, 59.99999... seconds."
:::

::: {.addtoany_share_save_container .addtoany_content_bottom}
::: {.a2a_kit .a2a_kit_size_32 .addtoany_list a2a-url="http://lymcanada.org/34/" a2a-title="Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 34 :  Power and Curvature"}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F34%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2034%20%3A%20%20Power%20and%20Curvature "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F34%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2034%20%3A%20%20Power%20and%20Curvature "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/google_plus?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F34%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2034%20%3A%20%20Power%20and%20Curvature "Google+"){.a2a_button_google_plus}
[](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd .addtoany_share_save}
:::
:::
:::

[ [ Posted on ]{.screen-reader-text} [February 20, 2010 December 30,
2014](http://lymcanada.org/34/) ]{.posted-on} [ [ [ Author
]{.screen-reader-text} [Bruce
Director](http://lymcanada.org/author/bdirector/){.url .fn .n} ]{.author
.vcard} ]{.byline} [ [ Categories ]{.screen-reader-text}
[EN](http://lymcanada.org/category/en/) , [Riemann for
Anti-Dummies](http://lymcanada.org/category/science-1/c132-riemann-for-anti-dummies/)
]{.cat-links}
