::: entry-header
# Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 35 : Mind as a Power Generator {#riemann-for-anti-dummies-part-35-mind-as-a-power-generator .entry-title}
:::

::: entry-content
::: pf-content
::: {align="center"}
**Riemann For Anti-Dummies Part 35**
:::

MIND AS POWER GENERATOR

Rene Descartes (1596-1630) was, for all intents and purposes, a Bogomil.
The geometry that bears his name, is brainwashing. Anyone exposed to it,
unless cured, will suffer from cognitive deficiency. Symptoms include
impotence and an inability to distinguish fantasy from reality.

Gottfried Leibniz, writing to Molanus, circa 1679, recognized the
deleterious effects of Cartesianism, "Cartesians are not capable of
discovery; they merely undertake the job of interpreting or commenting
upon their master, as the Scholastics did with Aristotle. There have
been many beautiful discoveries since Descartes, but, as far as I know,
not one of them has come from a true Cartesian.... Descartes himself had
a rather limited mind."

Descartes' method is impotent. It lacks power. Go back to the
investigations of the Pythagoreans, Archytas, Menaechmus and Plato, on
the matter of doubling the line, square and cube. These discoveries
demonstrated, the relationship between objects and the principles from
which they are generated. Each principle possess a characteristic power.
The succession of objects-- line, square and cube-- are produced by a
succession of higher powers (dunamis). These powers are not defined by
the objects. The objects are produced by the powers. The powers cannot
be known through the senses. The characteristics of the physical powers
are, nevertheless, made sensible through their harmony, which only the
mind has the power to grasp.

As can be seen from the solutions to doubling the cube by Archytas and
Menaechmus, the harmonic relationship among these powers reflects a
characteristic curvature, that, when projected onto straight lines,
produces the relationships the Pythagoreans recognized as the
arithmetic, geometric and sub-contrary, (or harmonic) means. The
arithmetic mean is three numbers related by a common difference: c -- a
= b -- c, or, c = 1/2 (a+b). Geometrically, it is represented by the
half-way point along a line; musically it corresponds to the interval of
the fifth. The geometric mean is three numbers in constant proportion:
a:b::b:c. Geometrically it is represented by the middle square between
two squares; musically it corresponds to the Lydian interval. The
harmonic mean is the inverse of the arithmetic mean: 1/c = 1/2(1/a+1/b).
It is expressed geometrically in the hyperbola and musically by the
interval of the fourth. These harmonic relationships are number shadows
cast by the curved onto the straight. (See Riemann for Anti-Dummies 33.
EIR website.)

Riemann generalized these Greek discoveries by his notion of multiply
extended magnitude. The line is an artifact of a simply-extended
manifold, the square an artifact of a doubly-extended manifold, and the
cube an artifact of triply-extended manifold. For Riemann, as for
Pythagoras, Archytas, Menaechmus, Plato, et al., each increase of degree
of extension, from "n" to "n+1", occurs by the addition of a new
principle, not a new independent "dimension". Consequently, a square
cannot be produced from a line, nor a cube from a square, because the
square is generated by a different principle than the line, as the cube
is generated from a different principle than the square. But, Riemann
also made clear, that extension alone is insufficient to determine
physical geometry. Another principle is necessary: physical curvature.
(See Riemman for Anti-Dummies, Parts 28, 29, 33, 34).

In Descartes' make-believe world, the concept of power is excised. "Any
problem in geometry can easily be reduced to such terms that a knowledge
of lengths of certain straight lines is sufficient for its
construction," is the opening of his treatise on analytical geometry.

As a true Bogomil, Descartes is perverse. He begins ass backward,
starting with numerical relationships, stripped of their power, and
pretending to generate curves, from only these numberical relationships
which he wrote down in the form of an algebraic equation. This is pure
fakery, as Descartes never derived any curve from these equations. All
the numerical relationships had already been discovered by Apollonius,
through the investigations of the relationship between curvature and
power. Descartes never generated a single curve whose harmonic
relationships had not already been discovered by the Greeks. Descartes'
intention was to strip the power from ideas and the idea of powers from
geometry.

To illustrate this point concretely, look at Menaechmus' solution for
the problem of doubling the cube, presented in Riemann for Anti-Dummies
33. Menaechmus demonstrated that the magnitude that doubles the cube is
formed by the intersection of a parabola and an hyperbola. Each curve
embodies a different set of proportions that emerge when the curved is
combined with the straight. For example, the hyperbola is formed by the
corner of a rectangle whose sides change such that the area remains the
same. The parabola is formed by the corner of a rectangle in which one
side is always the square of the other. These rectangles are made up of
straight lines, whose proportionality is determined by the curves. The
curves posses the power to produce that proportionality, and that power
is expressed in the relationship between the curve and the straight
lines produced by it. In other words, only a faker or a fool would
separate the curve, the straight-lines and the proportionality that
produces this complex of action. As Menaechmus demonstrates, when the
hyperbola and parabola are combined, a power is expressed by the
resulting proportionality, which is higher than exists in either curve
independently.

For Descartes, the straight lines are independent entities, created
without reason. The curve and the associated powers are deviations from
these straight lines. "Here it must be observed that by a ^2^ , b ^3^ ,
and similar expressions, I ordinarily mean only simple lines, which,
however, I name squares, cubes, etc., so that I may make use of the
terms employed in algebra," he confessed. Thus, the fantasy make believe
world of independent straight lines is taken as primary and the real
world of physical action, is only a deviation from the fantasy world.
Since, as Leibniz stated, this way of thinking is incapable of producing
discoveries, the only intention of those teaching it, is to condition
the students into believing the fantasy world has more power than
reality. (The baby-boomer populist's obsession that money equals
economic security is a typical result of this type of education.)

To hammer this home and to prepare the ground for taking on Riemann's
physical differential geometry, look at two physical examples: the conic
section orbit of a heavenly body around the sun; the catenary; and
Gauss' Geoid.

In the first case, the heavenly body is conforming to a unique curved
pathway around the sun, which Kepler and Gauss demonstrated was a conic
section with the sun at a common focus for all orbits. Thus, the orbits
define a physical pathway, and the sun a physical origin. The
straight-lines that have physical significance are the ones related to
the physical action. For example, the major axis of an elliptical orbit
is the line that connects the points of minimum and maximum speed, which
are also the points of maximum curvature. The parameter of the orbit is
the line going through the sun that is perpendicular to the major axis
of the conic section. The minor axis of the elliptical orbit is the line
connecting the points of minimum curvature of the orbit. These lines
express the harmonic relationships of the arithmetic, geometric and
harmonic means, which in turn reflect the higher powers, the "reason"
why the planet's orbit takes the shape it does. (See Appendix to "How
Gauss Determined the Orbit of Ceres", Summer 1998 Fidelio.)

Now look at the catenary. Despite Descartes' boast that his method could
solve any problem in geometry, the hanging chain proved him wrong. The
catenary presents a different problem than the conic section orbits. It
did not conform to any known geometrical figure, so its nature had to be
discovered only from its physical characteristics. This presented a
problem for Descartes because unless the nature of the curve was known,
he could not determine where to put his straight lines.

Leibniz and Bernoulli demonstrated, that physical nature of the catenary
is expressed by the relationship between any point on the chain, and the
lowest point. That relationship is measured by the tangents to the curve
at these two points. (See "Justice for the Catenary", Schiller Institute
website.) The tangent to the lowest point is always perpendicular to the
pull of gravity, i.e. horizontal. The relationship of the force between
any point on the catenary and this lowest point, is measured by the
sines of the angles formed by the tangents to these two points, and a
vertical line drawn from the lowest point. In other words, the physical
action at any point on the catenary, is expressed by a "differential"
relationship between the angles formed by these three lines. The
horizontal tangent to the lowest point, which is perpendicular to the
pull of gravity, a vertical line drawn from that point, which is along
the direction of the pull of gravity, and the tangent to the point on
the curve.

Leibniz and Bernoulli showed that this "differential" change does not
conform to any previous known algebraic curve. It does not exist in
Descartes' world. Descartes could not determine how to construct this
curve from straight lines. (Anyone indoctrinated in Descartes method
will be getting very uncomfortable now.) But, obviously the chain exists
in the real world. As we just observed, the only lines that are relevant
are those determined, physically, by the changing relationship of the
catenary to the pull of gravity and the perpendicular to the pull of
gravity. This changing relationship is not determined by Cartesian
geometry. It is determined by the physical curvature of the pull of
gravity. Leibniz and Bernoulli demonstrated, that this relationship is
expressed by the exponential and hyperbolic functions, both of which are
expressions of a succession of higher powers, and as such,
undiscoverable by the Cartesian method. (See Riemann for Anti-Dummies
33. EIR website.)

Gauss' Geoid presents a still different problem. In the previous two
examples, the "differential" of action was along a pathway determined by
the principle of universal gravitation. In these cases, the
"differential" could be determined with respect to a doubly-extended
magnitude. (The major axis and parameter for the orbit and the pull of
gravity and its perpendicular for the catenary.) In determining the
shape of the Earth, Gauss confronted the addition of a new principle.
Instead of measuring along a pathway in a doubly-extended surface, he
was measuring changes of the surface itself. For pedagogical purposes,
think of measuring a triangle on a perfect sphere. How does the shape of
that triangle change as the area of the triangle increases? Compare this
with measuring a triangle on an irregular surface, such as a watermelon.
One the sphere, the sides of the triangles change because they are
circles in all directions. However, on a watermelon, the sides of the
triangle change according to a different principle depending on the
direction. To measure this type of change, Gauss invented a new type of
complex differential, which will be developed more fully in future
pedagogicals.

To summarize the epistemological issues raised in this pedagogical, we
quote Leibniz disputing Descartes theory of motion:

"There was a time when I believed that all phenomena of motion could be
explained on purely geometrical principles, assuming no metaphysical
propositions...But, through a more profound meditation, I discovered
that this is impossible, and I learned a truth higher than all
mechanics, namely that everything in nature can indeed be explained
mechanically, but that th e principles of mechanics themselves depend on
metaphysical and, in a sense moral principles, that is, on the
contemplation of the most perfectly effectual efficient and final cause,
namely, God...

"...I discovered that this, so to speak, inertia of bodies cannot be
deduced from the initially assumed notion of matter and motion, where
matter is understood as that which is extended or fills space, and
motion is understood as change of space or place. But rather, over and
above that which is deduced from extension and its variation or
modification alone, we must add and recognize in bodies certain notions
or forms that are immaterial, so to speak, or independent of extension,
which you can call powers, by means of which speed is adjusted to
magnitude. These powers consist not in motion, indeed, not in conatus or
the beginning of motion, but in the cause or in that intrinsic reason
for motion, which is the law required for continuing. And investigators
have erred insofar as they considered motion, but not motive power or
the reason for motion, which even if derived from God, author and
governor of things, must not be understood as being n God himself, but
must be understood as having been produced and conserved by him in
things. From this we shall also show that it is not the same quantity of
motion (which misleads many), but the same powers that are conserved in
the world."
:::

::: {.addtoany_share_save_container .addtoany_content_bottom}
::: {.a2a_kit .a2a_kit_size_32 .addtoany_list a2a-url="http://lymcanada.org/35/" a2a-title="Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 35 :  Mind as a Power Generator"}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F35%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2035%20%3A%20%20Mind%20as%20a%20Power%20Generator "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F35%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2035%20%3A%20%20Mind%20as%20a%20Power%20Generator "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/google_plus?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F35%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2035%20%3A%20%20Mind%20as%20a%20Power%20Generator "Google+"){.a2a_button_google_plus}
[](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd .addtoany_share_save}
:::
:::
:::

[ [ Posted on ]{.screen-reader-text} [February 20, 2010 December 30,
2014](http://lymcanada.org/35/) ]{.posted-on} [ [ [ Author
]{.screen-reader-text} [Bruce
Director](http://lymcanada.org/author/bdirector/){.url .fn .n} ]{.author
.vcard} ]{.byline} [ [ Categories ]{.screen-reader-text}
[EN](http://lymcanada.org/category/en/) , [Riemann for
Anti-Dummies](http://lymcanada.org/category/science-1/c132-riemann-for-anti-dummies/)
]{.cat-links}

::: entry-header
# Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 35 : Mind as a Power Generator {#riemann-for-anti-dummies-part-35-mind-as-a-power-generator-1 .entry-title}
:::

::: entry-content
::: pf-content
::: {align="center"}
**Riemann For Anti-Dummies Part 35**
:::

MIND AS POWER GENERATOR

Rene Descartes (1596-1630) was, for all intents and purposes, a Bogomil.
The geometry that bears his name, is brainwashing. Anyone exposed to it,
unless cured, will suffer from cognitive deficiency. Symptoms include
impotence and an inability to distinguish fantasy from reality.

Gottfried Leibniz, writing to Molanus, circa 1679, recognized the
deleterious effects of Cartesianism, "Cartesians are not capable of
discovery; they merely undertake the job of interpreting or commenting
upon their master, as the Scholastics did with Aristotle. There have
been many beautiful discoveries since Descartes, but, as far as I know,
not one of them has come from a true Cartesian.... Descartes himself had
a rather limited mind."

Descartes' method is impotent. It lacks power. Go back to the
investigations of the Pythagoreans, Archytas, Menaechmus and Plato, on
the matter of doubling the line, square and cube. These discoveries
demonstrated, the relationship between objects and the principles from
which they are generated. Each principle possess a characteristic power.
The succession of objects-- line, square and cube-- are produced by a
succession of higher powers (dunamis). These powers are not defined by
the objects. The objects are produced by the powers. The powers cannot
be known through the senses. The characteristics of the physical powers
are, nevertheless, made sensible through their harmony, which only the
mind has the power to grasp.

As can be seen from the solutions to doubling the cube by Archytas and
Menaechmus, the harmonic relationship among these powers reflects a
characteristic curvature, that, when projected onto straight lines,
produces the relationships the Pythagoreans recognized as the
arithmetic, geometric and sub-contrary, (or harmonic) means. The
arithmetic mean is three numbers related by a common difference: c -- a
= b -- c, or, c = 1/2 (a+b). Geometrically, it is represented by the
half-way point along a line; musically it corresponds to the interval of
the fifth. The geometric mean is three numbers in constant proportion:
a:b::b:c. Geometrically it is represented by the middle square between
two squares; musically it corresponds to the Lydian interval. The
harmonic mean is the inverse of the arithmetic mean: 1/c = 1/2(1/a+1/b).
It is expressed geometrically in the hyperbola and musically by the
interval of the fourth. These harmonic relationships are number shadows
cast by the curved onto the straight. (See Riemann for Anti-Dummies 33.
EIR website.)

Riemann generalized these Greek discoveries by his notion of multiply
extended magnitude. The line is an artifact of a simply-extended
manifold, the square an artifact of a doubly-extended manifold, and the
cube an artifact of triply-extended manifold. For Riemann, as for
Pythagoras, Archytas, Menaechmus, Plato, et al., each increase of degree
of extension, from "n" to "n+1", occurs by the addition of a new
principle, not a new independent "dimension". Consequently, a square
cannot be produced from a line, nor a cube from a square, because the
square is generated by a different principle than the line, as the cube
is generated from a different principle than the square. But, Riemann
also made clear, that extension alone is insufficient to determine
physical geometry. Another principle is necessary: physical curvature.
(See Riemman for Anti-Dummies, Parts 28, 29, 33, 34).

In Descartes' make-believe world, the concept of power is excised. "Any
problem in geometry can easily be reduced to such terms that a knowledge
of lengths of certain straight lines is sufficient for its
construction," is the opening of his treatise on analytical geometry.

As a true Bogomil, Descartes is perverse. He begins ass backward,
starting with numerical relationships, stripped of their power, and
pretending to generate curves, from only these numberical relationships
which he wrote down in the form of an algebraic equation. This is pure
fakery, as Descartes never derived any curve from these equations. All
the numerical relationships had already been discovered by Apollonius,
through the investigations of the relationship between curvature and
power. Descartes never generated a single curve whose harmonic
relationships had not already been discovered by the Greeks. Descartes'
intention was to strip the power from ideas and the idea of powers from
geometry.

To illustrate this point concretely, look at Menaechmus' solution for
the problem of doubling the cube, presented in Riemann for Anti-Dummies
33. Menaechmus demonstrated that the magnitude that doubles the cube is
formed by the intersection of a parabola and an hyperbola. Each curve
embodies a different set of proportions that emerge when the curved is
combined with the straight. For example, the hyperbola is formed by the
corner of a rectangle whose sides change such that the area remains the
same. The parabola is formed by the corner of a rectangle in which one
side is always the square of the other. These rectangles are made up of
straight lines, whose proportionality is determined by the curves. The
curves posses the power to produce that proportionality, and that power
is expressed in the relationship between the curve and the straight
lines produced by it. In other words, only a faker or a fool would
separate the curve, the straight-lines and the proportionality that
produces this complex of action. As Menaechmus demonstrates, when the
hyperbola and parabola are combined, a power is expressed by the
resulting proportionality, which is higher than exists in either curve
independently.

For Descartes, the straight lines are independent entities, created
without reason. The curve and the associated powers are deviations from
these straight lines. "Here it must be observed that by a ^2^ , b ^3^ ,
and similar expressions, I ordinarily mean only simple lines, which,
however, I name squares, cubes, etc., so that I may make use of the
terms employed in algebra," he confessed. Thus, the fantasy make believe
world of independent straight lines is taken as primary and the real
world of physical action, is only a deviation from the fantasy world.
Since, as Leibniz stated, this way of thinking is incapable of producing
discoveries, the only intention of those teaching it, is to condition
the students into believing the fantasy world has more power than
reality. (The baby-boomer populist's obsession that money equals
economic security is a typical result of this type of education.)

To hammer this home and to prepare the ground for taking on Riemann's
physical differential geometry, look at two physical examples: the conic
section orbit of a heavenly body around the sun; the catenary; and
Gauss' Geoid.

In the first case, the heavenly body is conforming to a unique curved
pathway around the sun, which Kepler and Gauss demonstrated was a conic
section with the sun at a common focus for all orbits. Thus, the orbits
define a physical pathway, and the sun a physical origin. The
straight-lines that have physical significance are the ones related to
the physical action. For example, the major axis of an elliptical orbit
is the line that connects the points of minimum and maximum speed, which
are also the points of maximum curvature. The parameter of the orbit is
the line going through the sun that is perpendicular to the major axis
of the conic section. The minor axis of the elliptical orbit is the line
connecting the points of minimum curvature of the orbit. These lines
express the harmonic relationships of the arithmetic, geometric and
harmonic means, which in turn reflect the higher powers, the "reason"
why the planet's orbit takes the shape it does. (See Appendix to "How
Gauss Determined the Orbit of Ceres", Summer 1998 Fidelio.)

Now look at the catenary. Despite Descartes' boast that his method could
solve any problem in geometry, the hanging chain proved him wrong. The
catenary presents a different problem than the conic section orbits. It
did not conform to any known geometrical figure, so its nature had to be
discovered only from its physical characteristics. This presented a
problem for Descartes because unless the nature of the curve was known,
he could not determine where to put his straight lines.

Leibniz and Bernoulli demonstrated, that physical nature of the catenary
is expressed by the relationship between any point on the chain, and the
lowest point. That relationship is measured by the tangents to the curve
at these two points. (See "Justice for the Catenary", Schiller Institute
website.) The tangent to the lowest point is always perpendicular to the
pull of gravity, i.e. horizontal. The relationship of the force between
any point on the catenary and this lowest point, is measured by the
sines of the angles formed by the tangents to these two points, and a
vertical line drawn from the lowest point. In other words, the physical
action at any point on the catenary, is expressed by a "differential"
relationship between the angles formed by these three lines. The
horizontal tangent to the lowest point, which is perpendicular to the
pull of gravity, a vertical line drawn from that point, which is along
the direction of the pull of gravity, and the tangent to the point on
the curve.

Leibniz and Bernoulli showed that this "differential" change does not
conform to any previous known algebraic curve. It does not exist in
Descartes' world. Descartes could not determine how to construct this
curve from straight lines. (Anyone indoctrinated in Descartes method
will be getting very uncomfortable now.) But, obviously the chain exists
in the real world. As we just observed, the only lines that are relevant
are those determined, physically, by the changing relationship of the
catenary to the pull of gravity and the perpendicular to the pull of
gravity. This changing relationship is not determined by Cartesian
geometry. It is determined by the physical curvature of the pull of
gravity. Leibniz and Bernoulli demonstrated, that this relationship is
expressed by the exponential and hyperbolic functions, both of which are
expressions of a succession of higher powers, and as such,
undiscoverable by the Cartesian method. (See Riemann for Anti-Dummies
33. EIR website.)

Gauss' Geoid presents a still different problem. In the previous two
examples, the "differential" of action was along a pathway determined by
the principle of universal gravitation. In these cases, the
"differential" could be determined with respect to a doubly-extended
magnitude. (The major axis and parameter for the orbit and the pull of
gravity and its perpendicular for the catenary.) In determining the
shape of the Earth, Gauss confronted the addition of a new principle.
Instead of measuring along a pathway in a doubly-extended surface, he
was measuring changes of the surface itself. For pedagogical purposes,
think of measuring a triangle on a perfect sphere. How does the shape of
that triangle change as the area of the triangle increases? Compare this
with measuring a triangle on an irregular surface, such as a watermelon.
One the sphere, the sides of the triangles change because they are
circles in all directions. However, on a watermelon, the sides of the
triangle change according to a different principle depending on the
direction. To measure this type of change, Gauss invented a new type of
complex differential, which will be developed more fully in future
pedagogicals.

To summarize the epistemological issues raised in this pedagogical, we
quote Leibniz disputing Descartes theory of motion:

"There was a time when I believed that all phenomena of motion could be
explained on purely geometrical principles, assuming no metaphysical
propositions...But, through a more profound meditation, I discovered
that this is impossible, and I learned a truth higher than all
mechanics, namely that everything in nature can indeed be explained
mechanically, but that th e principles of mechanics themselves depend on
metaphysical and, in a sense moral principles, that is, on the
contemplation of the most perfectly effectual efficient and final cause,
namely, God...

"...I discovered that this, so to speak, inertia of bodies cannot be
deduced from the initially assumed notion of matter and motion, where
matter is understood as that which is extended or fills space, and
motion is understood as change of space or place. But rather, over and
above that which is deduced from extension and its variation or
modification alone, we must add and recognize in bodies certain notions
or forms that are immaterial, so to speak, or independent of extension,
which you can call powers, by means of which speed is adjusted to
magnitude. These powers consist not in motion, indeed, not in conatus or
the beginning of motion, but in the cause or in that intrinsic reason
for motion, which is the law required for continuing. And investigators
have erred insofar as they considered motion, but not motive power or
the reason for motion, which even if derived from God, author and
governor of things, must not be understood as being n God himself, but
must be understood as having been produced and conserved by him in
things. From this we shall also show that it is not the same quantity of
motion (which misleads many), but the same powers that are conserved in
the world."
:::

::: {.addtoany_share_save_container .addtoany_content_bottom}
::: {.a2a_kit .a2a_kit_size_32 .addtoany_list a2a-url="http://lymcanada.org/35/" a2a-title="Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 35 :  Mind as a Power Generator"}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F35%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2035%20%3A%20%20Mind%20as%20a%20Power%20Generator "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F35%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2035%20%3A%20%20Mind%20as%20a%20Power%20Generator "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/google_plus?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F35%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2035%20%3A%20%20Mind%20as%20a%20Power%20Generator "Google+"){.a2a_button_google_plus}
[](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd .addtoany_share_save}
:::
:::
:::

[ [ Posted on ]{.screen-reader-text} [February 20, 2010 December 30,
2014](http://lymcanada.org/35/) ]{.posted-on} [ [ [ Author
]{.screen-reader-text} [Bruce
Director](http://lymcanada.org/author/bdirector/){.url .fn .n} ]{.author
.vcard} ]{.byline} [ [ Categories ]{.screen-reader-text}
[EN](http://lymcanada.org/category/en/) , [Riemann for
Anti-Dummies](http://lymcanada.org/category/science-1/c132-riemann-for-anti-dummies/)
]{.cat-links}
