::: post-thumbnail
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.attachment-post-thumbnail
.size-post-thumbnail .wp-post-image width="700" height="478"
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part38_files_part38figure01.gif"}

\<img width=\"700\" height=\"478\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part38_files_part38figure01.gif\"
class=\"attachment-post-thumbnail size-post-thumbnail wp-post-image\"
alt=\"\" />
:::

::: entry-header
# Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 38 : You Are Not Impossible {#riemann-for-anti-dummies-part-38-you-are-not-impossible .entry-title}
:::

::: entry-content
::: pf-content
**Riemann for Anti-Dummies Part 38**

YOU ARE NOT IMPOSSIBLE

When Gauss set about writing his 1799 dissertation on what he called,
"The Fundamental Theorem of Algebra," he had already in his mind a fully
developed concept of the complex domain as the idea that penetrated most
deeply into the metaphysics of space, and he would spend the rest of his
life unfolding the implications of that youthful discovery. But, in
order to achieve what he would later call, "full civil rights for
complex numbers," he first had to root out the source of their
oppression: the popular acceptance of Euler's diktat that such numbers
were "impossible."

What one considers "impossible" is, fundamentally, a function of one's
concept of what is "possible." Think of the foolishness today of those
who insist that what Lyndon LaRouche says must be done, (most
emphatically his electability as President of the United States) is
"impossible." Their tragic mistake flows not from any reasoned,
scientific assessment of the matter. They assert its impossibility
because they don't want to face the possibility that their continued
existence is possible only if what they think is "impossible" actually
happens.

In one of his epistemological fragments, Bernhard Riemann spoke of the
significance of the possible for science:

"Natural science is the attempt to understand nature by means of exact
concepts.

"According to the concepts through which we comprehend nature our
perceptions are supplemented and filled in, not simply at each moment,
but also future perceptions are seen as necessary. Or, to the degree
that the conceptual system is not fully sufficient, future perceptions
are determined beforehand as probable; according to the concepts, what
is "possible" is determined (thus what is \`necessary' and conversely,
impossible). And the degree of possibility (of \`probability') of each
individual event which is seen as possible, in light of these concepts,
can be mathematically determined, if the concepts are precise enough.

"To the extent that what is necessary or probable, according to these
concepts, takes place, then this confirms the concepts, and the trust
that we place in these concepts rests on this confirmation through
experience. But, if something takes place that is unexpected according
to our existing assumptions, i.e. that is impossible or improbable
according to them, then the task arises of completing them or, if
necessary reworking the axioms, so that what is perceived ceases to be
impossible or, improbable. The completion or improvement of the
conceptual system forms the \`explanation' of the unexpected perception.
Our comprehension of nature gradually becomes more and more complete and
correct through this process, simultaneously penetrating more and more
behind the surface of appearances.

"The history of causal natural science, in so far as we can trace it
back, shows that this is, in fact, the way our knowledge of nature
advances. The conceptual systems that are now the basis for the natural
sciences, arose through a gradual transformation of older conceptual
systems, and the reasons that drove us to new modes of explanation can
always be traced back to contradictions and improbabilities that emerged
from the older modes of explanation."

By maintaining the "impossibility" of complex numbers, Euler, (whose
patrons were the enemies of the American Revolution), along with J.L.
Lagrange, (Napoleon's favorite mathematician), sought not merely to
exclude such magnitudes from mathematical calculations. Both Euler and
Lagrange made liberal use of these "impossible" magnitudes in formal
calculations. Rather, Euler et al. sought to exclude the possibility
that the human mind could penetrate beneath the surface of appearances
into the deeper domain of, what Plato called "powers," where complex
numbers arise.

In his 1799 dissertation Gauss attacked Euler's method directly:

"If imaginary quantities are to be retained in analysis at all (which
seems for several reasons more advisable than to abolish them, once they
are established in a solid manner), then they must necessarily be
considered equally possible as real quantities; for which reason I would
like to comprise the reals and the imaginaries under the common
denomination of {possible quantities}: Against which I would call
{impossible} a quantity that would have to fulfill conditions that could
not even be fulfilled by allowing imaginaries."

The existence of complex numbers was not only possible: It was necessary
to comprehend what ultimately made all numbers possible.

To establish this, Gauss tapped into the deep vein of investigations
that goes all the way back to the Pythagoreans, who understood number as
the means by which the mind expresses the harmonic principles that lie
beneath the shadow of sense perception.

Writing in "On Learned Ignorance," Nicholas of Cusa described this
concept of number this way:

"All those who investigate, judge the uncertain by comparing it to a
supposed by a system of proportions.... But the proportion which
expresses agreement in one aspect and difference in another, cannot be
understood without number. That is why number embraces everything which
is susceptible of proportions. Thus, it not only creates proportion in
quantity, but in every respect through which, by substance or accident,
(two things) might agree and disagree. Thus, Pythagoras rigorously
concluded that everything is constituted and comprehended through the
power of numbers."

Number has the power to express powers through proportions. Complex
numbers express proportions among powers.

For example, the power to double a square is expressed through the
geometric proportion 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, etc., even though the magnitude
that doubles the square is incommensurable to all these numbers.
Furthermore, the power that doubles the cube is also expressed, but in a
different way, by the same proportion, (as two geometric means between
two extremes instead of one), even though the magnitude that doubles the
cube is also incommensurable to all those numbers.

From this standpoint, all numbers can be generated by a succession of
powers, and this is what is meant by the term, "logarithm"--a term
coined by John Napier in 1594 from the Greek words "logos" and
"arithmos."

The most general form of this concept is expressed by Jakob Bernoulli's
equiangular spiral and Huygens' hyperbola. In the former, all possible
magnitudes are expressed by the radii whose lengths are a function of an
angle of rotation. Proportional lengths correspond to equal angles [(see
Figure
1)](http://archive.canadianpatriot.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part38_files_part38figure01.gif)
.

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **Figure 1**                                                          |
|                                                                       |
| ![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-co                                        |
| ntent/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full |
| .wp-image-310                                                         |
| lazy-src="http://archive.canadianpatriot.org/wp-content/uploads/      |
| sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part38_files_part38figure01.gif" |
| width="700" height="478"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-310\"     |
| src=\"http://archive.canadianpatriot.org/wp-content/uploads/s         |
| ites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part38_files_part38figure01.gif\" |
| width=\"700\" height=\"478\" />                                       |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

In the latter, all possible magnitudes are expressed by lengths along
the asymptote that correspond to equal areas [(see
Figure2).](http://archive.canadianpatriot.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part38_files_part38figure02.gif)

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **Figure 2**                                                          |
|                                                                       |
| ![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-co                                        |
| ntent/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full |
| .wp-image-312                                                         |
| lazy-src="http://archive.canadianpatriot.org/wp-content/uploads/      |
| sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part38_files_part38figure02.gif" |
| width="600" height="600"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-312\"     |
| src=\"http://archive.canadianpatriot.org/wp-content/uploads/s         |
| ites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part38_files_part38figure02.gif\" |
| width=\"600\" height=\"600\" />                                       |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

In both cases all possible positive quantities are expressed, inversely,
as a function of a power, expressed as either an angle (spiral) or an
area (hyperbola).

In both cases, adding the logarithm (angle or area) produces
proportional changes in length.

As discussed in the previous installment of this series, Leibniz brought
a crucial contradiction to light by posing the question, "What has the
power to produce a negative number?" This provoked a dispute with his
collaborator Johann Bernoulli, who insisted that negative numbers were
produced by the same powers as positive numbers. Leibniz, on the other
hand, correctly disagreed. For Leibniz the very existence of negative
numbers (which had been called "false" numbers) demanded a higher
principle, which Gauss later discovered as the complex domain.

For Gauss, negative numbers were not absolute quantities. They were
physically determined. In numerous locations, Gauss repeatedly
polemicized, (against I. Kant) that the difference between positive and
negative, right and left, up and down, could not be determined by
mathematics but only with reference to physical action.

Look at this from the standpoint of the above illustrations of the
spiral and hyperbola. Both generate all possible magnitudes as a
function of powers. But, in both cases, the exact same result can be
obtained, but in exactly the opposite orientation (see [Figure
3](http://archive.canadianpatriot.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part38_files_part38figure03.gif)
and [Figure
4](http://archive.canadianpatriot.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part38_files_part38figure04.gif)
). In Figure 3, you can see two spirals that produce the same
magnitudes, but in different directions.

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **Figure 3**                                                          |
|                                                                       |
| ![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-co                                        |
| ntent/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full |
| .wp-image-315                                                         |
| lazy-src="http://archive.canadianpatriot.org/wp-content/uploads/      |
| sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part38_files_part38figure03.gif" |
| width="670" height="668"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-315\"     |
| src=\"http://archive.canadianpatriot.org/wp-content/uploads/s         |
| ites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part38_files_part38figure03.gif\" |
| width=\"670\" height=\"668\" />                                       |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

In Figure 4 you can see two branches of an hyperbola that produce the
same magnitudes, but in different directions.

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **Figure 4**                                                          |
|                                                                       |
| ![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-co                                        |
| ntent/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full |
| .wp-image-316                                                         |
| lazy-src="http://archive.canadianpatriot.org/wp-content/uploads/      |
| sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part38_files_part38figure04.gif" |
| width="369" height="600"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-316\"     |
| src=\"http://archive.canadianpatriot.org/wp-content/uploads/s         |
| ites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part38_files_part38figure04.gif\" |
| width=\"369\" height=\"600\" />                                       |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

In each case, if one set of magnitudes is denoted positive numbers the
other set can be denoted negative. But, as Gauss pointed out, there is
no {a priori} way to distinguish one from the other. Only when presented
with both, is the existence of positive and negative established.

But, there is a still deeper, much more profound principle embedded in
this. Look at the transition between the positive and negative
hyperbola. The vertical asymptote is an "infinite" boundary separating
positive from negative. Similarly, for the spirals. The transition from
the positive to the negative spiral is the point of the change in
direction, which each spiral approaches, but never crosses.

Thus, the domain in which both positive and negative numbers exist
together must be of a higher power, where the powers that generate
powers reside. It comprises Gauss' domain of all possible (complex)
quantities.

Like all ideas, Gauss recognized that this domain could not be seen
directly, but, it, nevertheless, was susceptible of metaphorical
representation. Since it was the domain of powers, it could not be
represented by simple proportions among things, but as a proportion
between proportions. Consequently, each complex number represented a
proportion, not a quantity. The manifold of complex numbers, Gauss said,
could only be represented on a surface extended in two directions. The
physical example Gauss used was the geodesist's plane leveller. The
position of the bubble at rest is determined by both the axis of the
tube and the direction of the pull of gravity, which is perpendicular to
it.

On Gauss' surface each point represented a power that was denoted by a
complex number. Using some physically determined point and line as a
reference, each power, i.e., each complex number is generated by a
spiral action rotation and extension [(see Figure
5)](http://archive.canadianpatriot.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part38_files_part38figure05.gif)
.

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **Figure 5**                                                          |
|                                                                       |
| ![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-co                                        |
| ntent/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full |
| .wp-image-318                                                         |
| lazy-src="http://archive.canadianpatriot.org/wp-content/uploads/      |
| sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part38_files_part38figure05.gif" |
| width="700" height="466"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-318\"     |
| src=\"http://archive.canadianpatriot.org/wp-content/uploads/s         |
| ites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part38_files_part38figure05.gif\" |
| width=\"700\" height=\"466\" />                                       |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

In this way, proportions between proportions could be represented.

For example, a power acting on a power. In [Figure
6](http://archive.canadianpatriot.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part38_files_part38figure06.gif)
and [Animation
1](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part38_files/part38animation1.gif) ,
complex number a+bi represents a power produced by a combination of
rotation and extension. When that power acts on itself, it produces
(a+bi) ^2^ . When it acts on itself again it produces (a+bi) ^3^ , etc.
What results is a series of similar triangles conforming to an
equiangular spiral. While this spiral looks similar to Bernoulli's
spiral, it is different. Bernoulli's spiral represents a succession of
powers that produce simple magnitudes. Gauss' complex spiral represents
a higher power that produces a succession of powers, not simple
magnitudes.

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| **Figure 6**                      | **Animation 1**                   |
|                                   |                                   |
| ![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-conte | ![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-conte |
| nt/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc | nt/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc |
| /images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full | /images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full |
| .wp-image-320                     | .wp-image-321                     |
| l                                 | lazy                              |
| azy-src="http://archive.canadianp | -src="http://archive.canadianpatr |
| atriot.org/wp-content/uploads/sit | iot.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/ |
| es/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies | 2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_pa |
| _part38_files_part38figure06.gif" | rt38_files_part38animation01.gif" |
| width="303" height="500"} \<img   | width="314" height="400"} \<img   |
| class=\" size-full wp-image-320\" | class=\" size-full wp-image-321\" |
| src=\"http://archive.canadianpa   | s                                 |
| triot.org/wp-content/uploads/site | rc=\"http://archive.canadianpatri |
| s/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_ | ot.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2 |
| part38_files_part38figure06.gif\" | /2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_par |
| width=\"303\" height=\"500\" />   | t38_files_part38animation01.gif\" |
|                                   | width=\"314\" height=\"400\" />   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

[Figure
7](http://archive.canadianpatriot.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part38_files_part38figure07.gif)
, illustrates the more general case of the proportion between two
different powers, or, what is commonly known as multiplication. Here the
complex number 2 + i is multiplied by 1 + 2i to form 5i. In this case
the 2 + i forms the red triangle with vertices 0, 1, 2 + i. The product
is the point (5i) which forms the similar triangle with 0, 1 + 2i as its
base. (The schoolbook arithmetic idea of multiplication as a set of
rules is brainwashing. As Gauss emphasized, multiplication is a
proportion such that 1: a :: b: a x b. You, the reader, are left to
confirm this for yourself experimentally. Try experimenting with
Theatetus' squares and rectangles.)

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **Figure 7**                                                          |
|                                                                       |
| ![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-co                                        |
| ntent/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full |
| .wp-image-323                                                         |
| lazy-src="http://archive.canadianpatriot.org/wp-content/uploads/      |
| sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part38_files_part38figure07.gif" |
| width="266" height="600"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-323\"     |
| src=\"http://archive.canadianpatriot.org/wp-content/uploads/s         |
| ites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part38_files_part38figure07.gif\" |
| width=\"266\" height=\"600\" />                                       |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

As in the previous examples of the hyperbola and spiral, the
proportional changes in extension are "connected" by adding the angles
(logarithm) and multiplying the lengths.
:::

::: {.addtoany_share_save_container .addtoany_content_bottom}
::: {.a2a_kit .a2a_kit_size_32 .addtoany_list a2a-url="http://lymcanada.org/38/" a2a-title="Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 38 :  You Are Not Impossible"}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F38%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2038%20%3A%20%20You%20Are%20Not%20Impossible "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F38%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2038%20%3A%20%20You%20Are%20Not%20Impossible "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/google_plus?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F38%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2038%20%3A%20%20You%20Are%20Not%20Impossible "Google+"){.a2a_button_google_plus}
[](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd .addtoany_share_save}
:::
:::
:::

[ [ Posted on ]{.screen-reader-text} [February 20, 2010 December 30,
2014](http://lymcanada.org/38/) ]{.posted-on} [ [ [ Author
]{.screen-reader-text} [Bruce
Director](http://lymcanada.org/author/bdirector/){.url .fn .n} ]{.author
.vcard} ]{.byline} [ [ Categories ]{.screen-reader-text}
[EN](http://lymcanada.org/category/en/) , [Riemann for
Anti-Dummies](http://lymcanada.org/category/science-1/c132-riemann-for-anti-dummies/)
]{.cat-links}

::: post-thumbnail
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.attachment-post-thumbnail
.size-post-thumbnail .wp-post-image width="700" height="478"
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part38_files_part38figure01.gif"}

\<img width=\"700\" height=\"478\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part38_files_part38figure01.gif\"
class=\"attachment-post-thumbnail size-post-thumbnail wp-post-image\"
alt=\"\" />
:::

::: entry-header
# Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 38 : You Are Not Impossible {#riemann-for-anti-dummies-part-38-you-are-not-impossible-1 .entry-title}
:::

::: entry-content
::: pf-content
**Riemann for Anti-Dummies Part 38**

YOU ARE NOT IMPOSSIBLE

When Gauss set about writing his 1799 dissertation on what he called,
"The Fundamental Theorem of Algebra," he had already in his mind a fully
developed concept of the complex domain as the idea that penetrated most
deeply into the metaphysics of space, and he would spend the rest of his
life unfolding the implications of that youthful discovery. But, in
order to achieve what he would later call, "full civil rights for
complex numbers," he first had to root out the source of their
oppression: the popular acceptance of Euler's diktat that such numbers
were "impossible."

What one considers "impossible" is, fundamentally, a function of one's
concept of what is "possible." Think of the foolishness today of those
who insist that what Lyndon LaRouche says must be done, (most
emphatically his electability as President of the United States) is
"impossible." Their tragic mistake flows not from any reasoned,
scientific assessment of the matter. They assert its impossibility
because they don't want to face the possibility that their continued
existence is possible only if what they think is "impossible" actually
happens.

In one of his epistemological fragments, Bernhard Riemann spoke of the
significance of the possible for science:

"Natural science is the attempt to understand nature by means of exact
concepts.

"According to the concepts through which we comprehend nature our
perceptions are supplemented and filled in, not simply at each moment,
but also future perceptions are seen as necessary. Or, to the degree
that the conceptual system is not fully sufficient, future perceptions
are determined beforehand as probable; according to the concepts, what
is "possible" is determined (thus what is \`necessary' and conversely,
impossible). And the degree of possibility (of \`probability') of each
individual event which is seen as possible, in light of these concepts,
can be mathematically determined, if the concepts are precise enough.

"To the extent that what is necessary or probable, according to these
concepts, takes place, then this confirms the concepts, and the trust
that we place in these concepts rests on this confirmation through
experience. But, if something takes place that is unexpected according
to our existing assumptions, i.e. that is impossible or improbable
according to them, then the task arises of completing them or, if
necessary reworking the axioms, so that what is perceived ceases to be
impossible or, improbable. The completion or improvement of the
conceptual system forms the \`explanation' of the unexpected perception.
Our comprehension of nature gradually becomes more and more complete and
correct through this process, simultaneously penetrating more and more
behind the surface of appearances.

"The history of causal natural science, in so far as we can trace it
back, shows that this is, in fact, the way our knowledge of nature
advances. The conceptual systems that are now the basis for the natural
sciences, arose through a gradual transformation of older conceptual
systems, and the reasons that drove us to new modes of explanation can
always be traced back to contradictions and improbabilities that emerged
from the older modes of explanation."

By maintaining the "impossibility" of complex numbers, Euler, (whose
patrons were the enemies of the American Revolution), along with J.L.
Lagrange, (Napoleon's favorite mathematician), sought not merely to
exclude such magnitudes from mathematical calculations. Both Euler and
Lagrange made liberal use of these "impossible" magnitudes in formal
calculations. Rather, Euler et al. sought to exclude the possibility
that the human mind could penetrate beneath the surface of appearances
into the deeper domain of, what Plato called "powers," where complex
numbers arise.

In his 1799 dissertation Gauss attacked Euler's method directly:

"If imaginary quantities are to be retained in analysis at all (which
seems for several reasons more advisable than to abolish them, once they
are established in a solid manner), then they must necessarily be
considered equally possible as real quantities; for which reason I would
like to comprise the reals and the imaginaries under the common
denomination of {possible quantities}: Against which I would call
{impossible} a quantity that would have to fulfill conditions that could
not even be fulfilled by allowing imaginaries."

The existence of complex numbers was not only possible: It was necessary
to comprehend what ultimately made all numbers possible.

To establish this, Gauss tapped into the deep vein of investigations
that goes all the way back to the Pythagoreans, who understood number as
the means by which the mind expresses the harmonic principles that lie
beneath the shadow of sense perception.

Writing in "On Learned Ignorance," Nicholas of Cusa described this
concept of number this way:

"All those who investigate, judge the uncertain by comparing it to a
supposed by a system of proportions.... But the proportion which
expresses agreement in one aspect and difference in another, cannot be
understood without number. That is why number embraces everything which
is susceptible of proportions. Thus, it not only creates proportion in
quantity, but in every respect through which, by substance or accident,
(two things) might agree and disagree. Thus, Pythagoras rigorously
concluded that everything is constituted and comprehended through the
power of numbers."

Number has the power to express powers through proportions. Complex
numbers express proportions among powers.

For example, the power to double a square is expressed through the
geometric proportion 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, etc., even though the magnitude
that doubles the square is incommensurable to all these numbers.
Furthermore, the power that doubles the cube is also expressed, but in a
different way, by the same proportion, (as two geometric means between
two extremes instead of one), even though the magnitude that doubles the
cube is also incommensurable to all those numbers.

From this standpoint, all numbers can be generated by a succession of
powers, and this is what is meant by the term, "logarithm"--a term
coined by John Napier in 1594 from the Greek words "logos" and
"arithmos."

The most general form of this concept is expressed by Jakob Bernoulli's
equiangular spiral and Huygens' hyperbola. In the former, all possible
magnitudes are expressed by the radii whose lengths are a function of an
angle of rotation. Proportional lengths correspond to equal angles [(see
Figure
1)](http://archive.canadianpatriot.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part38_files_part38figure01.gif)
.

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **Figure 1**                                                          |
|                                                                       |
| ![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-co                                        |
| ntent/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full |
| .wp-image-310                                                         |
| lazy-src="http://archive.canadianpatriot.org/wp-content/uploads/      |
| sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part38_files_part38figure01.gif" |
| width="700" height="478"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-310\"     |
| src=\"http://archive.canadianpatriot.org/wp-content/uploads/s         |
| ites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part38_files_part38figure01.gif\" |
| width=\"700\" height=\"478\" />                                       |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

In the latter, all possible magnitudes are expressed by lengths along
the asymptote that correspond to equal areas [(see
Figure2).](http://archive.canadianpatriot.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part38_files_part38figure02.gif)

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **Figure 2**                                                          |
|                                                                       |
| ![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-co                                        |
| ntent/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full |
| .wp-image-312                                                         |
| lazy-src="http://archive.canadianpatriot.org/wp-content/uploads/      |
| sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part38_files_part38figure02.gif" |
| width="600" height="600"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-312\"     |
| src=\"http://archive.canadianpatriot.org/wp-content/uploads/s         |
| ites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part38_files_part38figure02.gif\" |
| width=\"600\" height=\"600\" />                                       |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

In both cases all possible positive quantities are expressed, inversely,
as a function of a power, expressed as either an angle (spiral) or an
area (hyperbola).

In both cases, adding the logarithm (angle or area) produces
proportional changes in length.

As discussed in the previous installment of this series, Leibniz brought
a crucial contradiction to light by posing the question, "What has the
power to produce a negative number?" This provoked a dispute with his
collaborator Johann Bernoulli, who insisted that negative numbers were
produced by the same powers as positive numbers. Leibniz, on the other
hand, correctly disagreed. For Leibniz the very existence of negative
numbers (which had been called "false" numbers) demanded a higher
principle, which Gauss later discovered as the complex domain.

For Gauss, negative numbers were not absolute quantities. They were
physically determined. In numerous locations, Gauss repeatedly
polemicized, (against I. Kant) that the difference between positive and
negative, right and left, up and down, could not be determined by
mathematics but only with reference to physical action.

Look at this from the standpoint of the above illustrations of the
spiral and hyperbola. Both generate all possible magnitudes as a
function of powers. But, in both cases, the exact same result can be
obtained, but in exactly the opposite orientation (see [Figure
3](http://archive.canadianpatriot.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part38_files_part38figure03.gif)
and [Figure
4](http://archive.canadianpatriot.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part38_files_part38figure04.gif)
). In Figure 3, you can see two spirals that produce the same
magnitudes, but in different directions.

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **Figure 3**                                                          |
|                                                                       |
| ![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-co                                        |
| ntent/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full |
| .wp-image-315                                                         |
| lazy-src="http://archive.canadianpatriot.org/wp-content/uploads/      |
| sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part38_files_part38figure03.gif" |
| width="670" height="668"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-315\"     |
| src=\"http://archive.canadianpatriot.org/wp-content/uploads/s         |
| ites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part38_files_part38figure03.gif\" |
| width=\"670\" height=\"668\" />                                       |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

In Figure 4 you can see two branches of an hyperbola that produce the
same magnitudes, but in different directions.

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **Figure 4**                                                          |
|                                                                       |
| ![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-co                                        |
| ntent/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full |
| .wp-image-316                                                         |
| lazy-src="http://archive.canadianpatriot.org/wp-content/uploads/      |
| sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part38_files_part38figure04.gif" |
| width="369" height="600"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-316\"     |
| src=\"http://archive.canadianpatriot.org/wp-content/uploads/s         |
| ites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part38_files_part38figure04.gif\" |
| width=\"369\" height=\"600\" />                                       |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

In each case, if one set of magnitudes is denoted positive numbers the
other set can be denoted negative. But, as Gauss pointed out, there is
no {a priori} way to distinguish one from the other. Only when presented
with both, is the existence of positive and negative established.

But, there is a still deeper, much more profound principle embedded in
this. Look at the transition between the positive and negative
hyperbola. The vertical asymptote is an "infinite" boundary separating
positive from negative. Similarly, for the spirals. The transition from
the positive to the negative spiral is the point of the change in
direction, which each spiral approaches, but never crosses.

Thus, the domain in which both positive and negative numbers exist
together must be of a higher power, where the powers that generate
powers reside. It comprises Gauss' domain of all possible (complex)
quantities.

Like all ideas, Gauss recognized that this domain could not be seen
directly, but, it, nevertheless, was susceptible of metaphorical
representation. Since it was the domain of powers, it could not be
represented by simple proportions among things, but as a proportion
between proportions. Consequently, each complex number represented a
proportion, not a quantity. The manifold of complex numbers, Gauss said,
could only be represented on a surface extended in two directions. The
physical example Gauss used was the geodesist's plane leveller. The
position of the bubble at rest is determined by both the axis of the
tube and the direction of the pull of gravity, which is perpendicular to
it.

On Gauss' surface each point represented a power that was denoted by a
complex number. Using some physically determined point and line as a
reference, each power, i.e., each complex number is generated by a
spiral action rotation and extension [(see Figure
5)](http://archive.canadianpatriot.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part38_files_part38figure05.gif)
.

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **Figure 5**                                                          |
|                                                                       |
| ![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-co                                        |
| ntent/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full |
| .wp-image-318                                                         |
| lazy-src="http://archive.canadianpatriot.org/wp-content/uploads/      |
| sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part38_files_part38figure05.gif" |
| width="700" height="466"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-318\"     |
| src=\"http://archive.canadianpatriot.org/wp-content/uploads/s         |
| ites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part38_files_part38figure05.gif\" |
| width=\"700\" height=\"466\" />                                       |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

In this way, proportions between proportions could be represented.

For example, a power acting on a power. In [Figure
6](http://archive.canadianpatriot.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part38_files_part38figure06.gif)
and [Animation
1](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part38_files/part38animation1.gif) ,
complex number a+bi represents a power produced by a combination of
rotation and extension. When that power acts on itself, it produces
(a+bi) ^2^ . When it acts on itself again it produces (a+bi) ^3^ , etc.
What results is a series of similar triangles conforming to an
equiangular spiral. While this spiral looks similar to Bernoulli's
spiral, it is different. Bernoulli's spiral represents a succession of
powers that produce simple magnitudes. Gauss' complex spiral represents
a higher power that produces a succession of powers, not simple
magnitudes.

+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+
| **Figure 6**                      | **Animation 1**                   |
|                                   |                                   |
| ![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-conte | ![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-conte |
| nt/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc | nt/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc |
| /images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full | /images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full |
| .wp-image-320                     | .wp-image-321                     |
| l                                 | lazy                              |
| azy-src="http://archive.canadianp | -src="http://archive.canadianpatr |
| atriot.org/wp-content/uploads/sit | iot.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/ |
| es/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies | 2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_pa |
| _part38_files_part38figure06.gif" | rt38_files_part38animation01.gif" |
| width="303" height="500"} \<img   | width="314" height="400"} \<img   |
| class=\" size-full wp-image-320\" | class=\" size-full wp-image-321\" |
| src=\"http://archive.canadianpa   | s                                 |
| triot.org/wp-content/uploads/site | rc=\"http://archive.canadianpatri |
| s/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_ | ot.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2 |
| part38_files_part38figure06.gif\" | /2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_par |
| width=\"303\" height=\"500\" />   | t38_files_part38animation01.gif\" |
|                                   | width=\"314\" height=\"400\" />   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

[Figure
7](http://archive.canadianpatriot.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part38_files_part38figure07.gif)
, illustrates the more general case of the proportion between two
different powers, or, what is commonly known as multiplication. Here the
complex number 2 + i is multiplied by 1 + 2i to form 5i. In this case
the 2 + i forms the red triangle with vertices 0, 1, 2 + i. The product
is the point (5i) which forms the similar triangle with 0, 1 + 2i as its
base. (The schoolbook arithmetic idea of multiplication as a set of
rules is brainwashing. As Gauss emphasized, multiplication is a
proportion such that 1: a :: b: a x b. You, the reader, are left to
confirm this for yourself experimentally. Try experimenting with
Theatetus' squares and rectangles.)

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **Figure 7**                                                          |
|                                                                       |
| ![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-co                                        |
| ntent/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full |
| .wp-image-323                                                         |
| lazy-src="http://archive.canadianpatriot.org/wp-content/uploads/      |
| sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part38_files_part38figure07.gif" |
| width="266" height="600"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-323\"     |
| src=\"http://archive.canadianpatriot.org/wp-content/uploads/s         |
| ites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part38_files_part38figure07.gif\" |
| width=\"266\" height=\"600\" />                                       |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

As in the previous examples of the hyperbola and spiral, the
proportional changes in extension are "connected" by adding the angles
(logarithm) and multiplying the lengths.
:::

::: {.addtoany_share_save_container .addtoany_content_bottom}
::: {.a2a_kit .a2a_kit_size_32 .addtoany_list a2a-url="http://lymcanada.org/38/" a2a-title="Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 38 :  You Are Not Impossible"}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F38%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2038%20%3A%20%20You%20Are%20Not%20Impossible "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F38%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2038%20%3A%20%20You%20Are%20Not%20Impossible "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/google_plus?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F38%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2038%20%3A%20%20You%20Are%20Not%20Impossible "Google+"){.a2a_button_google_plus}
[](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd .addtoany_share_save}
:::
:::
:::

[ [ Posted on ]{.screen-reader-text} [February 20, 2010 December 30,
2014](http://lymcanada.org/38/) ]{.posted-on} [ [ [ Author
]{.screen-reader-text} [Bruce
Director](http://lymcanada.org/author/bdirector/){.url .fn .n} ]{.author
.vcard} ]{.byline} [ [ Categories ]{.screen-reader-text}
[EN](http://lymcanada.org/category/en/) , [Riemann for
Anti-Dummies](http://lymcanada.org/category/science-1/c132-riemann-for-anti-dummies/)
]{.cat-links}
