::: post-thumbnail
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.attachment-post-thumbnail
.size-post-thumbnail .wp-post-image width="323" height="482"
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part50_files_part50figure01.gif"}

\<img width=\"323\" height=\"482\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part50_files_part50figure01.gif\"
class=\"attachment-post-thumbnail size-post-thumbnail wp-post-image\"
alt=\"\" />
:::

::: entry-header
# Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 50 : The Geometry of Change {#riemann-for-anti-dummies-part-50-the-geometry-of-change .entry-title}
:::

::: entry-content
::: pf-content

Riemann For Anti-Dummies Part 50

THE GEOMETRY OF CHANGE

In his famous letter to Hugyens concerning his discovery of the
significance of the square roots of negative numbers, G.W. Leibniz
stated clearly his recognition that this investigation originated with
the scientists of ancient Greece: "There is almost nothing more to be
desired for the use which algebra can or will be able to have in
mechanics and in practice. It is believable that this was the aim of the
geometry of the ancients (at least that of Apollonius) and the purpose
of loci that he had introduced...."

Understanding the implication of Leibniz' statement is crucial to
grasping the deeper significance of Gauss' 1799 treatment of the
fundamental theorem of algebra.

Leibniz' statement will either baffle, or enrage, a modern academic, but
such reactions only typify a broader social disease the inability, as
LaRouche has repeatedly emphasized, to recognize the essential
difference between human and beast. Like any disease, this one spreads
through infectious agents that attack the defenses of the victim,
causing the victim's own system to act as an agent for the aggressor.
The cure for such conditions is to strengthen the targeted population's
natural immunities, enabling them, not only to fight the disease, but to
become permanently resistant to its effects. In this case, those natural
immunities are the cognitive powers of the human mind. Hence, the
therapeutic effects of pedagogical exercises and classical art.

What Leibniz, Gauss, and their ancient predecessors understood, is that
the essential distinction between man and animal is the capacity of the
human mind to reach behind the domain of the senses and discover those
unseen principles that govern the changes perceived in the physical
universe. However, being unseen, those principles can only be discovered
through changes (motions) within the domain of the senses, which in turn
give rise to paradoxes concerning the relationship of the seen to the
unseen. Consequently, it is the coupled interaction between the seen and
the unseen that must be comprehended. Physical motion gives rise to the
willful motion (passion) of the mind from one state to a higher one. As
Leibniz indicates, no formal system, such as algebra or Euclidean
geometry, is capable of representing this characteristic of change that
emerges from the interaction between the seen and the unseen. Only a
geometry of change, such as the pre-Euclidean "spherics" of Thales and
the Pythagorean school, the geometry of motion associated with
Archimedes, Eratosthenes, and Apollonius, Leibniz' infinitesimal
calculus, or Gauss' concept of the complex domain, has such power.

Just as the origins of the discovery of the complex domain begin in the
ancient Mediterranean cultures of Egypt and Greece, so do the roots of
its adversary. The mode of attack has been to induce the false belief
that the physical world which is seen, and the immaterial world which is
unseen, do not interact, but are hermetically separated. This belief is
typified by the mystery cults of ancient Babylonian and Persian
cultures. The Eleatics, (such as Parmenides and Zeno) sought to
introduce this corruption into Greek culture, against Heraclites and the
Pythagoreans, by insisting that change is merely an illusion and does
not exist. (fn. 1)

Socrates made mincemeat of Parmenides' Eleatic argument, so those who
would today be called satanic, switched tactics, expressing the same
evil intent through forms of Sophistry, such as admitting that change
exists, but then arbitrarily defining change as the opposite of the Good
and defining the Good as that which does not change and is not corrupted
by change.

After Plato discredited the trickery of Sophistry, Aristotle, while
distancing himself formally from the Sophists, nevertheless propounded
the same evil in a new guise. For example, writing in his "Nichomachean
Ethics", Aristotle said :

"This is why God always enjoys a single and simple pleasure; for there
is not only an activity of movement but an activity of immobility, and
pleasure is found more in rest than in movement. But change in all
things is sweet, as the poet says, because of some vice; for as it is
the vicious man that is changeable, so the nature that needs change is
vicious; for it is not simple nor good."

Aristotle adopted this same view towards physical motion, stating in his
"Physics" that motion originates only from within a body, and that
irregular motion, because it contains more change, is of a lesser degree
than regular motion, which is of a lesser degree than rest.

Like the Sophists and the Eleatics, Aristotle was not developing an
original argument, but reacting against Plato's repeated demonstration
that the material and the immaterial are coupled:

" for this creation is mixed being made up of necessity and mind. Mind,
the ruling power, persuaded necessity to bring the greater part of
created things to perfection, and thus and after this manner in the
beginning, when the influence of reason got the better of necessity, the
universe was created." (Timaeus).

And it is the power to gain knowledge of the universe through the
interaction of the seen with the unseen, the temporal with the eternal,
that is human nature. Change is a characteristic, not of viciousness and
vice, but of perfection:

"But, now the sight of day and night, and the months and revolutions of
the years, have created number, and have given us a conception of time
and the power of enquiring about the nature of the universe; and from
this source we have derived philosophy, than which no greater good ever
was or will be given by the gods to mortal man...God invented and gave
us sight to the end that we might behold the courses of intelligence in
the heaven, and apply them to the courses of our own intelligence which
are akin to them, the unperturbed to the perturbed; and that we,
learning them and partaking of the natural truth of reason, might
imitate the absolutely unerring courses of God and regulate our own
vagaries. The same may be affirmed of speech and hearing;...Moreover, so
much of music as is adapted to the sound of the voice and to the sense
of hearing is granted to us for the sake of harmony; and harmony, which
has motions akin to the revolutions of our souls, is not regarded by the
intelligent votary of the Muses, as given by them with a view to
irrational pleasure, which is deemed to be the purpose of it in our day,
but as meant to correct any discord which may have arisen in the courses
of the soul, and to be our ally in bringing her into harmony and
agreement with herself; and rhythm too was given by them for the same
reason, on account of the irregular and graceless ways which prevail
among mankind generally, and to help us against them." (Timaeus.)

The tension of this Socratic irony, of the unchanging principles of
change, is the means by which man, and the universe as a whole, perfects
itself. As Kepler notes in the "New Astronomy", it is the tension from
the discovery that the planetary orbits are not circular, "that gives
rise to a powerful sense of wonder which at length drives men to look
into causes."

Remove that tension, as Aristotle, Euler, Lagrange, et al., do, and you
excise from Man his human nature, rendering him defenseless against
those oligarchical forces who seek to enslave him.

The Square Root of -1 and Motion
:::

::: {.addtoany_share_save_container .addtoany_content_bottom}
::: {.a2a_kit .a2a_kit_size_32 .addtoany_list a2a-url="http://lymcanada.org/50/" a2a-title="Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 50 :  The Geometry of Change"}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F50%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2050%20%3A%20%20The%20Geometry%20of%20Change "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F50%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2050%20%3A%20%20The%20Geometry%20of%20Change "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/google_plus?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F50%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2050%20%3A%20%20The%20Geometry%20of%20Change "Google+"){.a2a_button_google_plus}
[](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd .addtoany_share_save}
:::
:::
:::

[ [ Posted on ]{.screen-reader-text} [February 20, 2010 February 24,
2019](http://lymcanada.org/50/) ]{.posted-on} [ [ [ Author
]{.screen-reader-text} [Bruce
Director](http://lymcanada.org/author/bdirector/){.url .fn .n} ]{.author
.vcard} ]{.byline} [ [ Categories ]{.screen-reader-text}
[EN](http://lymcanada.org/category/en/) , [Riemmann for
Anti-Dummies](http://lymcanada.org/category/science-1/c132-riemmann-for-anti-dummies/)
]{.cat-links}

::: post-thumbnail
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.attachment-post-thumbnail
.size-post-thumbnail .wp-post-image width="323" height="482"
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part50_files_part50figure01.gif"}

\<img width=\"323\" height=\"482\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part50_files_part50figure01.gif\"
class=\"attachment-post-thumbnail size-post-thumbnail wp-post-image\"
alt=\"\" />
:::

::: entry-header
# Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 50 : The Geometry of Change {#riemann-for-anti-dummies-part-50-the-geometry-of-change-1 .entry-title}
:::

::: entry-content
::: pf-content

Riemann For Anti-Dummies Part 50

THE GEOMETRY OF CHANGE

In his famous letter to Hugyens concerning his discovery of the
significance of the square roots of negative numbers, G.W. Leibniz
stated clearly his recognition that this investigation originated with
the scientists of ancient Greece: "There is almost nothing more to be
desired for the use which algebra can or will be able to have in
mechanics and in practice. It is believable that this was the aim of the
geometry of the ancients (at least that of Apollonius) and the purpose
of loci that he had introduced...."

Understanding the implication of Leibniz' statement is crucial to
grasping the deeper significance of Gauss' 1799 treatment of the
fundamental theorem of algebra.

Leibniz' statement will either baffle, or enrage, a modern academic, but
such reactions only typify a broader social disease the inability, as
LaRouche has repeatedly emphasized, to recognize the essential
difference between human and beast. Like any disease, this one spreads
through infectious agents that attack the defenses of the victim,
causing the victim's own system to act as an agent for the aggressor.
The cure for such conditions is to strengthen the targeted population's
natural immunities, enabling them, not only to fight the disease, but to
become permanently resistant to its effects. In this case, those natural
immunities are the cognitive powers of the human mind. Hence, the
therapeutic effects of pedagogical exercises and classical art.

What Leibniz, Gauss, and their ancient predecessors understood, is that
the essential distinction between man and animal is the capacity of the
human mind to reach behind the domain of the senses and discover those
unseen principles that govern the changes perceived in the physical
universe. However, being unseen, those principles can only be discovered
through changes (motions) within the domain of the senses, which in turn
give rise to paradoxes concerning the relationship of the seen to the
unseen. Consequently, it is the coupled interaction between the seen and
the unseen that must be comprehended. Physical motion gives rise to the
willful motion (passion) of the mind from one state to a higher one. As
Leibniz indicates, no formal system, such as algebra or Euclidean
geometry, is capable of representing this characteristic of change that
emerges from the interaction between the seen and the unseen. Only a
geometry of change, such as the pre-Euclidean "spherics" of Thales and
the Pythagorean school, the geometry of motion associated with
Archimedes, Eratosthenes, and Apollonius, Leibniz' infinitesimal
calculus, or Gauss' concept of the complex domain, has such power.

Just as the origins of the discovery of the complex domain begin in the
ancient Mediterranean cultures of Egypt and Greece, so do the roots of
its adversary. The mode of attack has been to induce the false belief
that the physical world which is seen, and the immaterial world which is
unseen, do not interact, but are hermetically separated. This belief is
typified by the mystery cults of ancient Babylonian and Persian
cultures. The Eleatics, (such as Parmenides and Zeno) sought to
introduce this corruption into Greek culture, against Heraclites and the
Pythagoreans, by insisting that change is merely an illusion and does
not exist. (fn. 1)

Socrates made mincemeat of Parmenides' Eleatic argument, so those who
would today be called satanic, switched tactics, expressing the same
evil intent through forms of Sophistry, such as admitting that change
exists, but then arbitrarily defining change as the opposite of the Good
and defining the Good as that which does not change and is not corrupted
by change.

After Plato discredited the trickery of Sophistry, Aristotle, while
distancing himself formally from the Sophists, nevertheless propounded
the same evil in a new guise. For example, writing in his "Nichomachean
Ethics", Aristotle said :

"This is why God always enjoys a single and simple pleasure; for there
is not only an activity of movement but an activity of immobility, and
pleasure is found more in rest than in movement. But change in all
things is sweet, as the poet says, because of some vice; for as it is
the vicious man that is changeable, so the nature that needs change is
vicious; for it is not simple nor good."

Aristotle adopted this same view towards physical motion, stating in his
"Physics" that motion originates only from within a body, and that
irregular motion, because it contains more change, is of a lesser degree
than regular motion, which is of a lesser degree than rest.

Like the Sophists and the Eleatics, Aristotle was not developing an
original argument, but reacting against Plato's repeated demonstration
that the material and the immaterial are coupled:

" for this creation is mixed being made up of necessity and mind. Mind,
the ruling power, persuaded necessity to bring the greater part of
created things to perfection, and thus and after this manner in the
beginning, when the influence of reason got the better of necessity, the
universe was created." (Timaeus).

And it is the power to gain knowledge of the universe through the
interaction of the seen with the unseen, the temporal with the eternal,
that is human nature. Change is a characteristic, not of viciousness and
vice, but of perfection:

"But, now the sight of day and night, and the months and revolutions of
the years, have created number, and have given us a conception of time
and the power of enquiring about the nature of the universe; and from
this source we have derived philosophy, than which no greater good ever
was or will be given by the gods to mortal man...God invented and gave
us sight to the end that we might behold the courses of intelligence in
the heaven, and apply them to the courses of our own intelligence which
are akin to them, the unperturbed to the perturbed; and that we,
learning them and partaking of the natural truth of reason, might
imitate the absolutely unerring courses of God and regulate our own
vagaries. The same may be affirmed of speech and hearing;...Moreover, so
much of music as is adapted to the sound of the voice and to the sense
of hearing is granted to us for the sake of harmony; and harmony, which
has motions akin to the revolutions of our souls, is not regarded by the
intelligent votary of the Muses, as given by them with a view to
irrational pleasure, which is deemed to be the purpose of it in our day,
but as meant to correct any discord which may have arisen in the courses
of the soul, and to be our ally in bringing her into harmony and
agreement with herself; and rhythm too was given by them for the same
reason, on account of the irregular and graceless ways which prevail
among mankind generally, and to help us against them." (Timaeus.)

The tension of this Socratic irony, of the unchanging principles of
change, is the means by which man, and the universe as a whole, perfects
itself. As Kepler notes in the "New Astronomy", it is the tension from
the discovery that the planetary orbits are not circular, "that gives
rise to a powerful sense of wonder which at length drives men to look
into causes."

Remove that tension, as Aristotle, Euler, Lagrange, et al., do, and you
excise from Man his human nature, rendering him defenseless against
those oligarchical forces who seek to enslave him.

The Square Root of -1 and Motion
:::

::: {.addtoany_share_save_container .addtoany_content_bottom}
::: {.a2a_kit .a2a_kit_size_32 .addtoany_list a2a-url="http://lymcanada.org/50/" a2a-title="Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 50 :  The Geometry of Change"}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F50%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2050%20%3A%20%20The%20Geometry%20of%20Change "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F50%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2050%20%3A%20%20The%20Geometry%20of%20Change "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/google_plus?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F50%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2050%20%3A%20%20The%20Geometry%20of%20Change "Google+"){.a2a_button_google_plus}
[](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd .addtoany_share_save}
:::
:::
:::

[ [ Posted on ]{.screen-reader-text} [February 20, 2010 February 24,
2019](http://lymcanada.org/50/) ]{.posted-on} [ [ [ Author
]{.screen-reader-text} [Bruce
Director](http://lymcanada.org/author/bdirector/){.url .fn .n} ]{.author
.vcard} ]{.byline} [ [ Categories ]{.screen-reader-text}
[EN](http://lymcanada.org/category/en/) , [Riemmann for
Anti-Dummies](http://lymcanada.org/category/science-1/c132-riemmann-for-anti-dummies/)
]{.cat-links}
