::: post-thumbnail
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part58_files_afigure01%20riemann58.gif){.attachment-post-thumbnail
.size-post-thumbnail .wp-post-image width="300" height="255"}
:::

::: entry-header
# Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 58 : Bernhard Riemann {#riemann-for-anti-dummies-part-58-bernhard-riemann .entry-title}
:::

::: entry-content
::: pf-content
## Bernhard Riemann's "Dirichlet's Priniciple"

by Bruce Director

In his revolutionary essay of 1857, {Theory of Abelian Functions},
Bernhard Riemann brought to light the deeper epistemological
significance of the complex domain, through a new and bold application
of a principle of physical action which he called, "Dirichlet's
Principle". Riemann's approach, combined with what he enunciated in his
habilitation dissertation of 1854, not only ushered in a revolution in
scientific thinking: it ignited a counter-reaction as fierce as the one
launched, for the same reasons, against Cusa, Kepler, Fermat and Leibniz
by the Venetian-British controlled empiricist school of Gallileo,
Newton, Euler and Lagrange; a counter-reaction that continues to rage to
this day, and with implications that reach far beyond the specific
setting of Riemann's 1857 paper. Despite the volumes that have been
written on this subject, from Riemann's time to ours, an honest
examination of the history of the matter reveals that, just as Gauss
demonstrated the fraud of Euler, Lagrange and D'Alembert in his 1799
proof of the fundamental theorem of algebra, Riemann was right, and his
critics, like today's Straussian controllers of Bush and Cheney, were
malevolent frauds.\
We cannot know for sure whether, when Riemann chose to call this method
an application of "Dirichlet's Principle", he expected to provoke the
reaction he received, or if he was merely stating what would have been
obvious for anyone within the extended network of Abraham Kaestner's
students. Nevertheless, it is fortunate for us that he used that name,
as it enables us to fairly accurately reconstruct, not only the
scientific origins of Riemann's thought, but the historical-political
process from which it arose.

Lejeune-Dirichlet

Johann Peter Gustav Lejeune-Dirichlet was a pivotal figure in early 19th
Century science. Born in 1805 to a family of Belgian origin living near
Aachen, his early education took place in Bonn. At the age of 16, with a
copy of Gauss's {Disquisitiones Arithmeticae} under his arm, he went to
Paris to audit the lectures at the College de France and the Faculte des
Sciences. After a year, Dirichlet became employed as a tutor by General
Maximilien Sebastien Foy, a republican member of the Chamber of
Deputies, who introduced him to Alexander von Humboldt. After Foy's
death in 1825, von Humboldt recruited Dirichlet back to Germany,
arranged for him to get a degree (even though Dirichlet refused to speak
Latin), and eventually succeeded in obtaining for him a professorship at
the University of Berlin. There, in addition to meeting, and marrying,
Moses Mendelssohn's granddaughter, Rebecca, (the sister of the composer
Felix Mendelssohn), Dirichlet developed a fruitful collaboration with
Jacobi and Jakob Steiner , including a tour with both to Italy in 1843
under Alexander von Humboldt's sponsorship.\
In 1847 Riemann arrived in Berlin to study with Dirichlet, Jacobi and
Steiner, having spent the previous two years studying with Gauss. In
1849 he returned to Goettingen to complete his studies and in 1851,
under Gauss's direction, published his doctoral dissertation, {The
Foundations for a general Theory of Functions of a Complex Variable
Magnitude}, in which he first applied his principle, without mention of
Dirichlet. When Gauss died in 1855, Dirichlet was appointed his
successor, bringing himself back into contact with Riemann, who, just
seven months earlier, had received permission to teach, after delivering
his habilitation lecture, {On the Hypotheses which Lie at the
Foundations of Geometry}. In 1857, Riemann published the {Theory of
Abelian Functions} in which, for the first time, he identified the
principle on which his new theories were based, as "Dirichlet's
Principle". Two years later, Dirichlet died, and Riemann, now 33 years
old, was appointed to his chair, a position he held until his own,
unfortunately too early death, only seven years later.

The Potential

What Riemann called "Dirichlet's Principle", arose out of Gauss's
application of the complex domain to his investigations in geodesy and
terrestrial magnetism; the former organized in collaboration with
Schumacher beginning in 1818, and the latter initiated by Alexander von
Humboldt in 1832. Both projects had enormous practical benefits. Each
produced detailed maps of their respective physical effects which were
vital for infrastructure development, and Humboldt's project organized,
for the first time, an international collaborative network of scientists
who would impact the development of the physical economy from the
Americas to Eurasia for generations. But Gauss recognized that both
projects posed deeper epistemological questions for science. Writing in
his {General Theory of Earthmagnetism} in 1839, Gauss said a complete
and accurate map of the observations is not, in itself, a proper goal
for science. "One has only the cornerstone, not the building, as long as
one has not subjugated the appearances to an underlying principle."
Citing the case of astronomy as an example, Gauss said that mapping the
observations of the apparent motion of the heavenly bodies onto the
celestial sphere is just a beginning. Only once the underlying principle
of gravitation is discovered, can the actual orbits of the planets be
determined.\
Gauss recognized that the first step in geodesy and geomagnetism is the
measurement of changes in the effect of both phenomena on the measuring
instruments. In the case of geodesy, that meant changes in the direction
of a plumb bob, or plane level, as those changes are mapped onto the
celestial sphere. The case of geomagnetism is more complicated. Here he
was measuring changes in the direction of a compass needle, with respect
to three directions and time. The general question was: what is the
characteristic nature of the principle of gravitation or geomagnetism
that would produce these apparent effects? The specific task was: how,
from these infinitesimally small measured changes in the apparent
effects, can that general characteristic be determined?\
It is the second question that brings us more directly into contact with
what Riemann called "Dirichlet's Principle". However, the task of
understanding Dirichlet's Principle will be made much easier if we first
look at the elementary, but congruent case of the catenary.\
The relevant focus for this discussion is the devastating rebuke which
Leibniz and Bernoulli delivered to Gallileo and Newton over the case of
the catenary. Gallileo had insisted that all that need, or could, be
known about the catenary was a description of its visible shape. On the
other hand, Leibniz and Bernoulli insisted that the shape of the
catenary was merely the visible effect of an underlying physical
principle, and the correct shape could not be determined until the
underlying principle was known. As was developed in previous
installments of this series, Leibniz and Bernoulli determined the
characteristic nature of that principle, by determining first, the
changing physical effect of that principle in the infinitesimally small,
and then, by inversion, the overall characteristic of the principle. The
result was Leibniz's discovery that the shape of the hanging chain
reflected the least-action effect of the principle of universal
gravitation, and that this effect could be expressed geometrically as
the arithmetic mean between two contrariwise exponential functions.\
It is of extreme importance to emphasize that we are speaking here of
the physical hanging chain, not a formal mathematical expression. In a
formal mathematical expression the exponential curves have no boundary.
The physical hanging chain does--the positions of the hanging points.
Consequently, the specific shape of the chain is determined by the
position of the hanging points relative to the weight and length of the
chain. If the positions of the hanging points change, the position of
every link in the chain also changes, but always in accordance with the
relationship cited above. In other words, as the boundary conditions of
the physical chain change, so does the chain's specific path, but that
path's general form, required by the principle of least-action, is
always a catenary. It will never become a parabola or any other curve.
(See Figure 1.)

![](){height="255" width="300"}\
This example illustrates an aspect of the method that Leibniz originally
called "analysis situs", or what Gauss and Carnot later called "geometry
of position", that is relevant to an understanding of Riemann's
"Dirichlet's Principle". The positions of the individual links in the
chain are a function of the relationship of the boundary conditions
(position of the hanging points relative to the length of the chain) to
the characteristic curvature of the principle of gravitation, and not by
a pair-wise relationship among the links themselves. In other words, the
position of any individual link is not determined by a distance to the
right or left and a distance up and down from its neighbors, as the
Cartesians and Newtonians would insist. Rather, the position of each
link is a function of the characteristic of change of the physical
action as a whole. Any change in the boundary conditions changes the
position of every link, { as a whole} in conformity with the
least-action principle of the catenary. Thus, the unseen physical
principle's effect in the visible domain is expressed by the
characteristic of change the principle of least-action demands. This is
what determines the specific positions of the links. That is, position
is a function of change.\
Gauss recognized that the principles underlying geodesy and geomagnetism
could be understood by an extension of Leibniz's method. He rejected the
popularly accepted, but provably false method of Newton, that attempted
to explain these phenomena as the pair-wise interaction of material
bodies, according to the algebraic formula of the inverse square. (See
{Riemann for Anti-Dummies--Part 53 "Look to the Potential"}. Instead,
Gauss insisted that these phenomena, like the catenary, must be
understood as one process, and that the local variations in the position
of the plumb bob or the compass needle are a function of the
characteristic of the principle governing the phenomenon as a whole.
That whole, Gauss called "the potential", which is the Latin equivalent
of the Greek, "dynamis" or Leibniz's "kraft" or "vis viva". Gauss
invented the idea of a "potential function" to express the least-action
effect of the physical principle over an area or volume, in a similar,
but extended, manner to that used by Leibniz to express the effect of
gravity in producing the curvature of the hanging chain. To accomplish
this, Gauss extended Leibniz's idea of a function into the complex
domain.\
This transformed Leibniz's functions, which characterized a single
minimal pathway, into Gauss's "potential function," which characterized
a whole class of minimal pathways: in effect, a function of functions.
In other words, if Leibniz's catenary is understood to be a minimal
pathway determined by one set of two functions, Gauss's potential
function takes the next step: to a function that unifies two (or more)
{sets} of functions. Riemann would later show that these sets of minimal
pathways implicitly defined minimal surfaces, as, for example, the
catenoid formed by a soap film suspended between two circular rings.\
These sets of functions are not arbitrary. They are related by a special
type of relationship, called by the descriptive names, "spherical
functions", or "harmonic functions." An harmonic or spherical function
is a set of orthogonal functions all of whose curvatures are changing at
the same rate.\
This can be most easily illustrated pedagogically with some geometric
examples. A set of concentric circles and radial lines comprises an
harmonic function because both the circles and the radial lines
intersect orthogonally and both have constant curvature. (See Figure 2)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure0220riemann58.gif){height="300"
width="300"}

A more illustrative example is a set of orthogonal ellipses and
hyperbolas. (See Figure 3.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure0320riemann58.gif){height="257"
width="300"}

To get an intuitive grasp of their harmonic relationship, carry out the
following thought. Each ellipse is associated with a confocal orthogonal
hyperbola. Beginning at the point where both curves meet the axis,
create in your mind a connected action that moves simultaneously on both
curves. (See Figure 4.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure0420riemann58.gif){height="257"
width="300"}

Note that as the curvature on the hyperbola becomes less curved, so does
the curvature on the corresponding ellipse, and at the same rate.\
Thus, harmonic functions relate two sets of different curves such that
the rate of change of their respective curvatures is always equal.
(Using Leibniz's calculus, we could calculate this relationship
precisely, but an intuitive understanding is sufficient for present
purposes.)\
Furthermore, a set of harmonic functions need not be familiar curves
such as circles, lines, ellipses, or hyperbolas. In fact, very
complicated sets of functions can be harmonic. (See Figure 5.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure0520riemann58.gif){height="300"
width="300"}

By contrast, a set of circles and hyperbolas is not harmonic, because
the curvature of the circle is constant, while the curvature of the
hyperbola is changing. Consequently, the two sets of curves are not
orthogonal. (See Figure 6.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure0620riemann58.gif){height="300"
width="300"}

Gauss recognized that Leibniz's principle of least-action with respect
to the surfaces and volumes encountered in phenomena like terrestrial
gravitation and magnetism, could be expressed by harmonic functions. One
set of curves of the harmonic function expressed the pathways of minimal
change in the potential for action, while the other, orthogonal curves
expressed the pathways of maximum change in the potential for action.
For example, if the Earth were perfectly spherical, its minimum and
maximum of potential action could be expressed by a series of concentric
spherical shells and orthogonal planes. A cross-section of such a
configuration would be harmonically related circles and radial lines. If
the Earth were perfectly ellipsoidal, its potential would be expressed
by a set of triply orthogonal ellipsoids and hyperboloids whose cross
sections would be the harmonically related set of ellipses and
hyperbolas illustrated above.\
But, as Gauss emphasized, the shape of the Earth is much more
complicated than a sphere or an ellipsoid, with respect to both gravity
and magnetism and the pathways of minimal and maximal potential for
action were not such simple and well known curves as circles, lines,
ellipses or hyperbolas. Thus, a more complex harmonic function must be
found to express these principles. Such a function could not be
determined a priori, but only from the measured changes in the effect of
the Earth's gravity or magnetism.\
The question for Gauss was: how to determine the true physical shape of
the Earth, or the characteristic of the Earth's magnetism, from the
measured infinitesimally small changes in its potential obtained by his
geodetic and magnetic measurements?\
This begins to get us closer to a first approximation of what Riemann
called "Dirichlet's Principle".\
To make a precise determination of the Earth's surface, or magnetic
effect, as Gauss did, is quite complicated, but the principle on which
his method was based is within the scope of this pedagogy. If one
recognizes, as Gauss did, that the changes in the direction of the plumb
bob are measuring the changes in direction of the potential function,
then the physical shape of the Earth has the same relationship to this
potential as the hanging points have to the catenary. In other words,
the surface of the Earth must be understood as merely the boundary of
the potential, or, as Gauss put it: "The physical surface of the Earth
is, in a geometric sense, the surface that is everywhere perpendicular
to the pull of gravity."\
A reference to the ancient Pythagorean problem of doubling the line,
square and cube can shed some light on this idea. The line is bounded by
points, the square by lines and the cube by squares. The size and
position of these boundaries is determined by the length, area or volume
they enclose. For example, it is the square that determines the size and
position of its sides, even though it is the latter that you see and the
former that you don't. The sides of the square are lines, but they are
produced by a different power, (potential), than the lines produced from
other lines. Similarly, the size and position of the squares that form
the boundaries of a cube are produced by a different power (potential),
than the squares formed by the diagonal of another square. Thus, even
though the power can not be seen, it can be measured by its unique,
characteristic effect on the boundaries of its action.\
Now apply this same method of thought to the physical principles
discussed above. The catenary is a curve whose boundaries are points. A
catenoid is a surface whose boundaries are curves. The surface of the
Earth is the boundary of a gravitational volume. The magnetic effect of
the Earth is still more complicated, and will be taken up in more detail
in a future pedagogical.\
This connected relationship between the boundary conditions of a
physical process and the expression of the principle of least-action
with respect to that physical process, is the relationship to which
Riemann is referring when he speaks of "Dirichlet's Principle."

From Gauss to Dirichlet to Riemann

After succeeding Gauss in 1855, Dirichlet began lecturing on Gauss's
potential theory at Goettingen while Riemann was preparing his {Theory
of Abelian Functions}. What Gauss, Dirichlet and Riemann all recognized,
was that complex functions, as the extension of Leibniz's concept of the
catenary and natural logarithms, were uniquely suited to express the
least-action pathways of potential functions.\
Gauss had already demonstrated this in his 1799 proof or the fundamental
theorem of algebra, where he showed that a complex algebraic expression
produces two surfaces whose curvatures are harmonically related. What
Riemann attributes to Dirichlet, is the principle that given a certain
boundary condition, the function that minimizes the action within it is
a complex harmonic function.\
Warm up to this idea on the familiar territory of the catenary. The
boundary conditions here are the positions of the hanging points. The
"interior" of this boundary is the curve itself. Within the curve is a
singular point--the lowest point. If the boundary conditions change, by
changing the position of the hanging points, so does the position of the
lowest point. To state Dirichlet's principle in this simplified context,
the catenary is the least-action pathway of a hanging chain with these
specified boundary conditions and singularity. If the boundary
conditions change, the shape of the curve changes correspondingly, in
accordance with the preservation of the principle of least-action.\
Riemann inverted Dirichlet's principle: {since the physical principle of
least-action is primary, the position of the hanging points and the
lowest point completely determine the shape of the chain!}\
Now, make this same investigation with respect to a catenoid formed by a
soap film between two circular rings. This catenoid is a physical
least-action, or minimal surface. Embedded in this surface is an
orthogonal set of curves of minimal and maximal action. (Riemann later
showed that these curves are harmonically related. This will be
illustrated in a future installment of this series.) Experiment by
changing the shape of these boundaries from circles, to ellipses, to
irregular smooth shapes, to polygons. When you change the position or
shape of the boundaries of this surface, the shape of the surface and
the embedded curves change accordingly, but the least-action principle
is preserved.\
Now, generalize this idea with some other pedagogical examples,
illustrated in the following animations. In Figure 7 we see a set of
harmonically related circles and radial lines that intersect at the
center of the circles, being transformed while maintaining their
harmonic relationship.

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure0720riemann58.gif){height="288"
width="288"}
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure07b20riemann58.gif){height="288"
width="288"}

If the position of that intersection point changes, the radial lines
must be transformed into circular arcs, and their endpoints move along
the boundary in order to maintain their harmonic relationship. In the
animation, we see this effect as the point of intersection moves, first
away from the center, and then in a circular path around the center.
This motion causes all positions inside the boundary to change {as a
whole}. What doesn't change is the harmonic, i.e. least-action,
relationship.\
This could also be thought of inversely: that the changes in position of
the intersection of the radial lines at the boundary, cause their point
of intersection to move in a circular arc, and their form to change from
lines to circular arcs.\
Or, infinitesimally small changes in the curvature of the pathways are
determined by the conditions at the boundary with respect to the
position of the singularity.\
Compare this action with the change in the position of the lowest point
of the catenary as the positions of the hanging points change, as
illustrated in the animation Figure 1. There, a change in the boundary
points produced a change along a single curve. Here, a change in the
boundary curve produces a change in a set of harmonically related curves
within a surface.\
Compare this with the problem Gauss confronted in, for example,
determining the location of the Earth's magnetic poles from
infinitesimally small changes in the Earth's magnetic effect. Gauss
understood that those small changes were connected to the position of
the singularities, i.e. magnetic poles, of the Earth's magnetic effect.
However, the exact location, or even the number, of those poles was
still unknown in Gauss's time. On the basis of the measurements obtained
by von Humboldt's network, Gauss determined where those poles must be
located. The famous American Wilkes expedition of 1837 was launched, in
part, to confirm Gauss's findings, which it did.\
In Figure 8, this same effect is illustrated by moving the point of
intersection of the radial lines along the path of a lemniscate.

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure0820riemann58.gif){height="288"
width="288"}

Notice again how this change in the position of the singularity, changes
the condition at the boundary, so that all the resulting relationships
remain harmonic.\
Figure 9 animates the same process in which the shape of the boundary
has been changed to an ellipse, which correspondingly changes the shape
of the orthogonal curves into hyperbolas, and the intersection point
into two foci.

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure0920riemann58.gif){height="300"
width="300"}

Of course, it could also be said that the radial lines are changed into
hyperbolas, which changes the circles into ellipses, and the
intersection point in to two foci. Or, that the intersection point is
changed into two foci, which changes the the boundary into an ellipse,
and the radial lines into hyperbolas.\
In short: {a physical process of least action is a connected action.
Changing any aspect of the process, changes everything else in the
process correspondingly, so as to preserve the least-action
characteristic of the process. That is, it is the physical principle of
least-action that is primary.}\
It was Riemann's genius to recognize, through this application of
Dirichlet's Principle, that the principle of least-action of a physical
process could be understood completely by the relationship between the
boundary conditions and the singularities, and that this relationship
could be expressed uniquely by Riemann's geometric concept of complex
functions. Moreover, Riemann showed that the characteristic of
least-action of a physical process could be changed, in a fundamental
way, only by the addition of a new principle. That change in principle
is expressed in a complex function, as a corresponding increase in the
number of singularities. In his {Theory of Abelian Functions} Riemann
demonstrated this by applying Dirichlet's Principle to the higher
transcendental functions of Abel.\
The deeper significance of this discovery can only be hinted at in this
installment, and will be taken up in more depth later, but it can be
illustrated by the animation of Figure 10, which expresses the principle
of least-action with respect to an elliptical function.

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure1020riemann58.gif){height="288"
width="288"}

Riemann demonstrated that all elliptical functions, being functions
formed by the interaction of two connected principles, are expressed in
the complex domain as surfaces with two boundaries. (These boundaries
are marked in green in the animation.) In this animation you can see
each boundary changing differently, but connectedly, with the other,
causing corresponding changes in the minimal pathways, while at all
times maintaining the overall harmonic relationship of the function. In
other words, the characteristic curvature of these least-action pathways
is determined, in this case, by the connected interaction of two
distinct principles.\
A comparison between this and the previous examples indicates what
Riemann emphasized, that the only way to fundamentally change the
characteristic of action of a physical process is by the addition of the
action of a new principle. This more advanced question will be
investigated more thoroughly in future pedagogicals.\
A suggestive example from economics can also help illustrate this
principle. What is the relationship between all physical economic
relationships and the economic boundary conditions of physical
infrastructure and cultural development? What is the relationship
between these boundary conditions and the singularities represented by
the introduction of new technologies? What is the effect on all economic
relationships, of a change, positive or negative, in these physical
economic boundary conditions?\
Four years after Riemann's death Karl Weierstrass criticized Riemann's
application of Dirichlet's Principle on formal mathematical grounds.
Weierstrass contended that it was inappropriate to speak mathematically
of least-action, unless a formal mathematical proof could be presented
proving that a mathematical minimum, or maximum, existed. While it is
possible to produce a formal mathematical example which has no minimum,
all {physical} process are characterized by bounded least-action. For
example, as Cusa showed, there is no absolute maximum or absolute
minimum polygon because the polygon is bounded maximally by a circle
(which is not a polygon) and minimally by a line (which is also not a
polygon). Or, while a mathematical catenary can be extended into
infinity, the physical one is always bounded by the hanging points. For
Riemann, as for Gauss and Dirichlet, Weierstrass's demand for a formal
mathematical proof of a minimum was less than unnecessary, it was a
sophistry. The universal physical principle of least-action was
sufficient to supply the proof.\
Weierstrass's critique was seized upon by the formalists who were
desperate to roll back the achievements of Kaestner, Gauss, Dirichlet,
Jacobi, Abel, Riemann et al. and return science to the slavish days of
Euler, Lagrange and D'Alembert. Consequently, while the form of
Riemann's discoveries has been widely discussed, the substance of his
thinking has, by and large, been suppressed, until, it found new life in
the more advanced discoveries LaRouche.
:::

::: {.addtoany_share_save_container .addtoany_content_bottom}
::: {.a2a_kit .a2a_kit_size_32 .addtoany_list a2a-url="http://lymcanada.org/58/" a2a-title="Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part  58 :  Bernhard Riemann"}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F58%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%20%2058%20%3A%20%20Bernhard%20Riemann "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F58%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%20%2058%20%3A%20%20Bernhard%20Riemann "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/google_plus?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F58%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%20%2058%20%3A%20%20Bernhard%20Riemann "Google+"){.a2a_button_google_plus}
[](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd .addtoany_share_save}
:::
:::
:::

[ [ Posted on ]{.screen-reader-text} [February 20, 2010 February 24,
2019](http://lymcanada.org/58/) ]{.posted-on} [ [ [ Author
]{.screen-reader-text} [Bruce
Director](http://lymcanada.org/author/bdirector/){.url .fn .n} ]{.author
.vcard} ]{.byline} [ [ Categories ]{.screen-reader-text}
[EN](http://lymcanada.org/category/en/) , [Riemmann for
Anti-Dummies](http://lymcanada.org/category/science-1/c132-riemmann-for-anti-dummies/)
]{.cat-links}

::: post-thumbnail
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part58_files_afigure01%20riemann58.gif){.attachment-post-thumbnail
.size-post-thumbnail .wp-post-image width="300" height="255"}
:::

::: entry-header
# Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 58 : Bernhard Riemann {#riemann-for-anti-dummies-part-58-bernhard-riemann-1 .entry-title}
:::

::: entry-content
::: pf-content
## Bernhard Riemann's "Dirichlet's Priniciple"

by Bruce Director

In his revolutionary essay of 1857, {Theory of Abelian Functions},
Bernhard Riemann brought to light the deeper epistemological
significance of the complex domain, through a new and bold application
of a principle of physical action which he called, "Dirichlet's
Principle". Riemann's approach, combined with what he enunciated in his
habilitation dissertation of 1854, not only ushered in a revolution in
scientific thinking: it ignited a counter-reaction as fierce as the one
launched, for the same reasons, against Cusa, Kepler, Fermat and Leibniz
by the Venetian-British controlled empiricist school of Gallileo,
Newton, Euler and Lagrange; a counter-reaction that continues to rage to
this day, and with implications that reach far beyond the specific
setting of Riemann's 1857 paper. Despite the volumes that have been
written on this subject, from Riemann's time to ours, an honest
examination of the history of the matter reveals that, just as Gauss
demonstrated the fraud of Euler, Lagrange and D'Alembert in his 1799
proof of the fundamental theorem of algebra, Riemann was right, and his
critics, like today's Straussian controllers of Bush and Cheney, were
malevolent frauds.\
We cannot know for sure whether, when Riemann chose to call this method
an application of "Dirichlet's Principle", he expected to provoke the
reaction he received, or if he was merely stating what would have been
obvious for anyone within the extended network of Abraham Kaestner's
students. Nevertheless, it is fortunate for us that he used that name,
as it enables us to fairly accurately reconstruct, not only the
scientific origins of Riemann's thought, but the historical-political
process from which it arose.

Lejeune-Dirichlet

Johann Peter Gustav Lejeune-Dirichlet was a pivotal figure in early 19th
Century science. Born in 1805 to a family of Belgian origin living near
Aachen, his early education took place in Bonn. At the age of 16, with a
copy of Gauss's {Disquisitiones Arithmeticae} under his arm, he went to
Paris to audit the lectures at the College de France and the Faculte des
Sciences. After a year, Dirichlet became employed as a tutor by General
Maximilien Sebastien Foy, a republican member of the Chamber of
Deputies, who introduced him to Alexander von Humboldt. After Foy's
death in 1825, von Humboldt recruited Dirichlet back to Germany,
arranged for him to get a degree (even though Dirichlet refused to speak
Latin), and eventually succeeded in obtaining for him a professorship at
the University of Berlin. There, in addition to meeting, and marrying,
Moses Mendelssohn's granddaughter, Rebecca, (the sister of the composer
Felix Mendelssohn), Dirichlet developed a fruitful collaboration with
Jacobi and Jakob Steiner , including a tour with both to Italy in 1843
under Alexander von Humboldt's sponsorship.\
In 1847 Riemann arrived in Berlin to study with Dirichlet, Jacobi and
Steiner, having spent the previous two years studying with Gauss. In
1849 he returned to Goettingen to complete his studies and in 1851,
under Gauss's direction, published his doctoral dissertation, {The
Foundations for a general Theory of Functions of a Complex Variable
Magnitude}, in which he first applied his principle, without mention of
Dirichlet. When Gauss died in 1855, Dirichlet was appointed his
successor, bringing himself back into contact with Riemann, who, just
seven months earlier, had received permission to teach, after delivering
his habilitation lecture, {On the Hypotheses which Lie at the
Foundations of Geometry}. In 1857, Riemann published the {Theory of
Abelian Functions} in which, for the first time, he identified the
principle on which his new theories were based, as "Dirichlet's
Principle". Two years later, Dirichlet died, and Riemann, now 33 years
old, was appointed to his chair, a position he held until his own,
unfortunately too early death, only seven years later.

The Potential

What Riemann called "Dirichlet's Principle", arose out of Gauss's
application of the complex domain to his investigations in geodesy and
terrestrial magnetism; the former organized in collaboration with
Schumacher beginning in 1818, and the latter initiated by Alexander von
Humboldt in 1832. Both projects had enormous practical benefits. Each
produced detailed maps of their respective physical effects which were
vital for infrastructure development, and Humboldt's project organized,
for the first time, an international collaborative network of scientists
who would impact the development of the physical economy from the
Americas to Eurasia for generations. But Gauss recognized that both
projects posed deeper epistemological questions for science. Writing in
his {General Theory of Earthmagnetism} in 1839, Gauss said a complete
and accurate map of the observations is not, in itself, a proper goal
for science. "One has only the cornerstone, not the building, as long as
one has not subjugated the appearances to an underlying principle."
Citing the case of astronomy as an example, Gauss said that mapping the
observations of the apparent motion of the heavenly bodies onto the
celestial sphere is just a beginning. Only once the underlying principle
of gravitation is discovered, can the actual orbits of the planets be
determined.\
Gauss recognized that the first step in geodesy and geomagnetism is the
measurement of changes in the effect of both phenomena on the measuring
instruments. In the case of geodesy, that meant changes in the direction
of a plumb bob, or plane level, as those changes are mapped onto the
celestial sphere. The case of geomagnetism is more complicated. Here he
was measuring changes in the direction of a compass needle, with respect
to three directions and time. The general question was: what is the
characteristic nature of the principle of gravitation or geomagnetism
that would produce these apparent effects? The specific task was: how,
from these infinitesimally small measured changes in the apparent
effects, can that general characteristic be determined?\
It is the second question that brings us more directly into contact with
what Riemann called "Dirichlet's Principle". However, the task of
understanding Dirichlet's Principle will be made much easier if we first
look at the elementary, but congruent case of the catenary.\
The relevant focus for this discussion is the devastating rebuke which
Leibniz and Bernoulli delivered to Gallileo and Newton over the case of
the catenary. Gallileo had insisted that all that need, or could, be
known about the catenary was a description of its visible shape. On the
other hand, Leibniz and Bernoulli insisted that the shape of the
catenary was merely the visible effect of an underlying physical
principle, and the correct shape could not be determined until the
underlying principle was known. As was developed in previous
installments of this series, Leibniz and Bernoulli determined the
characteristic nature of that principle, by determining first, the
changing physical effect of that principle in the infinitesimally small,
and then, by inversion, the overall characteristic of the principle. The
result was Leibniz's discovery that the shape of the hanging chain
reflected the least-action effect of the principle of universal
gravitation, and that this effect could be expressed geometrically as
the arithmetic mean between two contrariwise exponential functions.\
It is of extreme importance to emphasize that we are speaking here of
the physical hanging chain, not a formal mathematical expression. In a
formal mathematical expression the exponential curves have no boundary.
The physical hanging chain does--the positions of the hanging points.
Consequently, the specific shape of the chain is determined by the
position of the hanging points relative to the weight and length of the
chain. If the positions of the hanging points change, the position of
every link in the chain also changes, but always in accordance with the
relationship cited above. In other words, as the boundary conditions of
the physical chain change, so does the chain's specific path, but that
path's general form, required by the principle of least-action, is
always a catenary. It will never become a parabola or any other curve.
(See Figure 1.)

![](){height="255" width="300"}\
This example illustrates an aspect of the method that Leibniz originally
called "analysis situs", or what Gauss and Carnot later called "geometry
of position", that is relevant to an understanding of Riemann's
"Dirichlet's Principle". The positions of the individual links in the
chain are a function of the relationship of the boundary conditions
(position of the hanging points relative to the length of the chain) to
the characteristic curvature of the principle of gravitation, and not by
a pair-wise relationship among the links themselves. In other words, the
position of any individual link is not determined by a distance to the
right or left and a distance up and down from its neighbors, as the
Cartesians and Newtonians would insist. Rather, the position of each
link is a function of the characteristic of change of the physical
action as a whole. Any change in the boundary conditions changes the
position of every link, { as a whole} in conformity with the
least-action principle of the catenary. Thus, the unseen physical
principle's effect in the visible domain is expressed by the
characteristic of change the principle of least-action demands. This is
what determines the specific positions of the links. That is, position
is a function of change.\
Gauss recognized that the principles underlying geodesy and geomagnetism
could be understood by an extension of Leibniz's method. He rejected the
popularly accepted, but provably false method of Newton, that attempted
to explain these phenomena as the pair-wise interaction of material
bodies, according to the algebraic formula of the inverse square. (See
{Riemann for Anti-Dummies--Part 53 "Look to the Potential"}. Instead,
Gauss insisted that these phenomena, like the catenary, must be
understood as one process, and that the local variations in the position
of the plumb bob or the compass needle are a function of the
characteristic of the principle governing the phenomenon as a whole.
That whole, Gauss called "the potential", which is the Latin equivalent
of the Greek, "dynamis" or Leibniz's "kraft" or "vis viva". Gauss
invented the idea of a "potential function" to express the least-action
effect of the physical principle over an area or volume, in a similar,
but extended, manner to that used by Leibniz to express the effect of
gravity in producing the curvature of the hanging chain. To accomplish
this, Gauss extended Leibniz's idea of a function into the complex
domain.\
This transformed Leibniz's functions, which characterized a single
minimal pathway, into Gauss's "potential function," which characterized
a whole class of minimal pathways: in effect, a function of functions.
In other words, if Leibniz's catenary is understood to be a minimal
pathway determined by one set of two functions, Gauss's potential
function takes the next step: to a function that unifies two (or more)
{sets} of functions. Riemann would later show that these sets of minimal
pathways implicitly defined minimal surfaces, as, for example, the
catenoid formed by a soap film suspended between two circular rings.\
These sets of functions are not arbitrary. They are related by a special
type of relationship, called by the descriptive names, "spherical
functions", or "harmonic functions." An harmonic or spherical function
is a set of orthogonal functions all of whose curvatures are changing at
the same rate.\
This can be most easily illustrated pedagogically with some geometric
examples. A set of concentric circles and radial lines comprises an
harmonic function because both the circles and the radial lines
intersect orthogonally and both have constant curvature. (See Figure 2)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure0220riemann58.gif){height="300"
width="300"}

A more illustrative example is a set of orthogonal ellipses and
hyperbolas. (See Figure 3.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure0320riemann58.gif){height="257"
width="300"}

To get an intuitive grasp of their harmonic relationship, carry out the
following thought. Each ellipse is associated with a confocal orthogonal
hyperbola. Beginning at the point where both curves meet the axis,
create in your mind a connected action that moves simultaneously on both
curves. (See Figure 4.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure0420riemann58.gif){height="257"
width="300"}

Note that as the curvature on the hyperbola becomes less curved, so does
the curvature on the corresponding ellipse, and at the same rate.\
Thus, harmonic functions relate two sets of different curves such that
the rate of change of their respective curvatures is always equal.
(Using Leibniz's calculus, we could calculate this relationship
precisely, but an intuitive understanding is sufficient for present
purposes.)\
Furthermore, a set of harmonic functions need not be familiar curves
such as circles, lines, ellipses, or hyperbolas. In fact, very
complicated sets of functions can be harmonic. (See Figure 5.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure0520riemann58.gif){height="300"
width="300"}

By contrast, a set of circles and hyperbolas is not harmonic, because
the curvature of the circle is constant, while the curvature of the
hyperbola is changing. Consequently, the two sets of curves are not
orthogonal. (See Figure 6.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure0620riemann58.gif){height="300"
width="300"}

Gauss recognized that Leibniz's principle of least-action with respect
to the surfaces and volumes encountered in phenomena like terrestrial
gravitation and magnetism, could be expressed by harmonic functions. One
set of curves of the harmonic function expressed the pathways of minimal
change in the potential for action, while the other, orthogonal curves
expressed the pathways of maximum change in the potential for action.
For example, if the Earth were perfectly spherical, its minimum and
maximum of potential action could be expressed by a series of concentric
spherical shells and orthogonal planes. A cross-section of such a
configuration would be harmonically related circles and radial lines. If
the Earth were perfectly ellipsoidal, its potential would be expressed
by a set of triply orthogonal ellipsoids and hyperboloids whose cross
sections would be the harmonically related set of ellipses and
hyperbolas illustrated above.\
But, as Gauss emphasized, the shape of the Earth is much more
complicated than a sphere or an ellipsoid, with respect to both gravity
and magnetism and the pathways of minimal and maximal potential for
action were not such simple and well known curves as circles, lines,
ellipses or hyperbolas. Thus, a more complex harmonic function must be
found to express these principles. Such a function could not be
determined a priori, but only from the measured changes in the effect of
the Earth's gravity or magnetism.\
The question for Gauss was: how to determine the true physical shape of
the Earth, or the characteristic of the Earth's magnetism, from the
measured infinitesimally small changes in its potential obtained by his
geodetic and magnetic measurements?\
This begins to get us closer to a first approximation of what Riemann
called "Dirichlet's Principle".\
To make a precise determination of the Earth's surface, or magnetic
effect, as Gauss did, is quite complicated, but the principle on which
his method was based is within the scope of this pedagogy. If one
recognizes, as Gauss did, that the changes in the direction of the plumb
bob are measuring the changes in direction of the potential function,
then the physical shape of the Earth has the same relationship to this
potential as the hanging points have to the catenary. In other words,
the surface of the Earth must be understood as merely the boundary of
the potential, or, as Gauss put it: "The physical surface of the Earth
is, in a geometric sense, the surface that is everywhere perpendicular
to the pull of gravity."\
A reference to the ancient Pythagorean problem of doubling the line,
square and cube can shed some light on this idea. The line is bounded by
points, the square by lines and the cube by squares. The size and
position of these boundaries is determined by the length, area or volume
they enclose. For example, it is the square that determines the size and
position of its sides, even though it is the latter that you see and the
former that you don't. The sides of the square are lines, but they are
produced by a different power, (potential), than the lines produced from
other lines. Similarly, the size and position of the squares that form
the boundaries of a cube are produced by a different power (potential),
than the squares formed by the diagonal of another square. Thus, even
though the power can not be seen, it can be measured by its unique,
characteristic effect on the boundaries of its action.\
Now apply this same method of thought to the physical principles
discussed above. The catenary is a curve whose boundaries are points. A
catenoid is a surface whose boundaries are curves. The surface of the
Earth is the boundary of a gravitational volume. The magnetic effect of
the Earth is still more complicated, and will be taken up in more detail
in a future pedagogical.\
This connected relationship between the boundary conditions of a
physical process and the expression of the principle of least-action
with respect to that physical process, is the relationship to which
Riemann is referring when he speaks of "Dirichlet's Principle."

From Gauss to Dirichlet to Riemann

After succeeding Gauss in 1855, Dirichlet began lecturing on Gauss's
potential theory at Goettingen while Riemann was preparing his {Theory
of Abelian Functions}. What Gauss, Dirichlet and Riemann all recognized,
was that complex functions, as the extension of Leibniz's concept of the
catenary and natural logarithms, were uniquely suited to express the
least-action pathways of potential functions.\
Gauss had already demonstrated this in his 1799 proof or the fundamental
theorem of algebra, where he showed that a complex algebraic expression
produces two surfaces whose curvatures are harmonically related. What
Riemann attributes to Dirichlet, is the principle that given a certain
boundary condition, the function that minimizes the action within it is
a complex harmonic function.\
Warm up to this idea on the familiar territory of the catenary. The
boundary conditions here are the positions of the hanging points. The
"interior" of this boundary is the curve itself. Within the curve is a
singular point--the lowest point. If the boundary conditions change, by
changing the position of the hanging points, so does the position of the
lowest point. To state Dirichlet's principle in this simplified context,
the catenary is the least-action pathway of a hanging chain with these
specified boundary conditions and singularity. If the boundary
conditions change, the shape of the curve changes correspondingly, in
accordance with the preservation of the principle of least-action.\
Riemann inverted Dirichlet's principle: {since the physical principle of
least-action is primary, the position of the hanging points and the
lowest point completely determine the shape of the chain!}\
Now, make this same investigation with respect to a catenoid formed by a
soap film between two circular rings. This catenoid is a physical
least-action, or minimal surface. Embedded in this surface is an
orthogonal set of curves of minimal and maximal action. (Riemann later
showed that these curves are harmonically related. This will be
illustrated in a future installment of this series.) Experiment by
changing the shape of these boundaries from circles, to ellipses, to
irregular smooth shapes, to polygons. When you change the position or
shape of the boundaries of this surface, the shape of the surface and
the embedded curves change accordingly, but the least-action principle
is preserved.\
Now, generalize this idea with some other pedagogical examples,
illustrated in the following animations. In Figure 7 we see a set of
harmonically related circles and radial lines that intersect at the
center of the circles, being transformed while maintaining their
harmonic relationship.

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure0720riemann58.gif){height="288"
width="288"}
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure07b20riemann58.gif){height="288"
width="288"}

If the position of that intersection point changes, the radial lines
must be transformed into circular arcs, and their endpoints move along
the boundary in order to maintain their harmonic relationship. In the
animation, we see this effect as the point of intersection moves, first
away from the center, and then in a circular path around the center.
This motion causes all positions inside the boundary to change {as a
whole}. What doesn't change is the harmonic, i.e. least-action,
relationship.\
This could also be thought of inversely: that the changes in position of
the intersection of the radial lines at the boundary, cause their point
of intersection to move in a circular arc, and their form to change from
lines to circular arcs.\
Or, infinitesimally small changes in the curvature of the pathways are
determined by the conditions at the boundary with respect to the
position of the singularity.\
Compare this action with the change in the position of the lowest point
of the catenary as the positions of the hanging points change, as
illustrated in the animation Figure 1. There, a change in the boundary
points produced a change along a single curve. Here, a change in the
boundary curve produces a change in a set of harmonically related curves
within a surface.\
Compare this with the problem Gauss confronted in, for example,
determining the location of the Earth's magnetic poles from
infinitesimally small changes in the Earth's magnetic effect. Gauss
understood that those small changes were connected to the position of
the singularities, i.e. magnetic poles, of the Earth's magnetic effect.
However, the exact location, or even the number, of those poles was
still unknown in Gauss's time. On the basis of the measurements obtained
by von Humboldt's network, Gauss determined where those poles must be
located. The famous American Wilkes expedition of 1837 was launched, in
part, to confirm Gauss's findings, which it did.\
In Figure 8, this same effect is illustrated by moving the point of
intersection of the radial lines along the path of a lemniscate.

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure0820riemann58.gif){height="288"
width="288"}

Notice again how this change in the position of the singularity, changes
the condition at the boundary, so that all the resulting relationships
remain harmonic.\
Figure 9 animates the same process in which the shape of the boundary
has been changed to an ellipse, which correspondingly changes the shape
of the orthogonal curves into hyperbolas, and the intersection point
into two foci.

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure0920riemann58.gif){height="300"
width="300"}

Of course, it could also be said that the radial lines are changed into
hyperbolas, which changes the circles into ellipses, and the
intersection point in to two foci. Or, that the intersection point is
changed into two foci, which changes the the boundary into an ellipse,
and the radial lines into hyperbolas.\
In short: {a physical process of least action is a connected action.
Changing any aspect of the process, changes everything else in the
process correspondingly, so as to preserve the least-action
characteristic of the process. That is, it is the physical principle of
least-action that is primary.}\
It was Riemann's genius to recognize, through this application of
Dirichlet's Principle, that the principle of least-action of a physical
process could be understood completely by the relationship between the
boundary conditions and the singularities, and that this relationship
could be expressed uniquely by Riemann's geometric concept of complex
functions. Moreover, Riemann showed that the characteristic of
least-action of a physical process could be changed, in a fundamental
way, only by the addition of a new principle. That change in principle
is expressed in a complex function, as a corresponding increase in the
number of singularities. In his {Theory of Abelian Functions} Riemann
demonstrated this by applying Dirichlet's Principle to the higher
transcendental functions of Abel.\
The deeper significance of this discovery can only be hinted at in this
installment, and will be taken up in more depth later, but it can be
illustrated by the animation of Figure 10, which expresses the principle
of least-action with respect to an elliptical function.

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure1020riemann58.gif){height="288"
width="288"}

Riemann demonstrated that all elliptical functions, being functions
formed by the interaction of two connected principles, are expressed in
the complex domain as surfaces with two boundaries. (These boundaries
are marked in green in the animation.) In this animation you can see
each boundary changing differently, but connectedly, with the other,
causing corresponding changes in the minimal pathways, while at all
times maintaining the overall harmonic relationship of the function. In
other words, the characteristic curvature of these least-action pathways
is determined, in this case, by the connected interaction of two
distinct principles.\
A comparison between this and the previous examples indicates what
Riemann emphasized, that the only way to fundamentally change the
characteristic of action of a physical process is by the addition of the
action of a new principle. This more advanced question will be
investigated more thoroughly in future pedagogicals.\
A suggestive example from economics can also help illustrate this
principle. What is the relationship between all physical economic
relationships and the economic boundary conditions of physical
infrastructure and cultural development? What is the relationship
between these boundary conditions and the singularities represented by
the introduction of new technologies? What is the effect on all economic
relationships, of a change, positive or negative, in these physical
economic boundary conditions?\
Four years after Riemann's death Karl Weierstrass criticized Riemann's
application of Dirichlet's Principle on formal mathematical grounds.
Weierstrass contended that it was inappropriate to speak mathematically
of least-action, unless a formal mathematical proof could be presented
proving that a mathematical minimum, or maximum, existed. While it is
possible to produce a formal mathematical example which has no minimum,
all {physical} process are characterized by bounded least-action. For
example, as Cusa showed, there is no absolute maximum or absolute
minimum polygon because the polygon is bounded maximally by a circle
(which is not a polygon) and minimally by a line (which is also not a
polygon). Or, while a mathematical catenary can be extended into
infinity, the physical one is always bounded by the hanging points. For
Riemann, as for Gauss and Dirichlet, Weierstrass's demand for a formal
mathematical proof of a minimum was less than unnecessary, it was a
sophistry. The universal physical principle of least-action was
sufficient to supply the proof.\
Weierstrass's critique was seized upon by the formalists who were
desperate to roll back the achievements of Kaestner, Gauss, Dirichlet,
Jacobi, Abel, Riemann et al. and return science to the slavish days of
Euler, Lagrange and D'Alembert. Consequently, while the form of
Riemann's discoveries has been widely discussed, the substance of his
thinking has, by and large, been suppressed, until, it found new life in
the more advanced discoveries LaRouche.
:::

::: {.addtoany_share_save_container .addtoany_content_bottom}
::: {.a2a_kit .a2a_kit_size_32 .addtoany_list a2a-url="http://lymcanada.org/58/" a2a-title="Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part  58 :  Bernhard Riemann"}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F58%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%20%2058%20%3A%20%20Bernhard%20Riemann "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F58%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%20%2058%20%3A%20%20Bernhard%20Riemann "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/google_plus?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F58%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%20%2058%20%3A%20%20Bernhard%20Riemann "Google+"){.a2a_button_google_plus}
[](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd .addtoany_share_save}
:::
:::
:::

[ [ Posted on ]{.screen-reader-text} [February 20, 2010 February 24,
2019](http://lymcanada.org/58/) ]{.posted-on} [ [ [ Author
]{.screen-reader-text} [Bruce
Director](http://lymcanada.org/author/bdirector/){.url .fn .n} ]{.author
.vcard} ]{.byline} [ [ Categories ]{.screen-reader-text}
[EN](http://lymcanada.org/category/en/) , [Riemmann for
Anti-Dummies](http://lymcanada.org/category/science-1/c132-riemmann-for-anti-dummies/)
]{.cat-links}
