::: post-thumbnail
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part59_files_afigure01%20riemann59.gif){.attachment-post-thumbnail
.size-post-thumbnail .wp-post-image width="400" height="218"}
:::

::: entry-header
# Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 59 : Think Infinitesimal {#riemann-for-anti-dummies-part-59-think-infinitesimal .entry-title}
:::

::: entry-content
::: pf-content
## Think Infinitesimal

by Bruce Director

"It is well known that scientific physics has existed only since the
invention of the differential calculus," stated Bernhard Riemann in his
introduction to his late 1854 lecture series posthumously published
under the title, "Partial Differential Equations and their Applications
to Physical Questions". For most of his listeners, Riemann's statement
would have been fairly straight forward, for they understood the
physical significance of Leibniz's calculus as it had percolated over
the preceding sesquicentury through the work of Kaestner and Gauss. A
far different condition exists, however, for most of today's readers,
whose education has been dominated by the empiricism of the
Leibniz-hating Euler, Cauchy and Russell. While such victims might find
the formal content of Riemann's statement agreeable, its true intention
would be as obscure to them as the Gospel of John and Epistles of Paul
are to Karl Rove and his legions of true believers.

The empiricist will not understand Riemann's statement, for the simple
reason that what he associates with the words "differential calculus" is
a completely different idea than what Riemann and Leibniz had in mind.
To the victim of today's empiricist-dominated educational system, the
infinitesimal calculus concerns only a set of rules for mathematical
formalism. But to the scientist, the infinitesimal calculus is a kind of
Socratic dialogue, through which man transcends the limitations of
sense-perception and discovers those universal principles that govern
all physical action.

The empiricist rejects Leibniz's notion, because he accepts Aristotle's
doctrine that "physics concerns only objects of sense", whereas Plato,
Cusa, Leibniz and Riemann emphasized, physics concerns objects of
{thought}. These thought-objects, or "Geistesmassen" as Riemann called
them, refer to the universal principles which {cause} the objects of
sense to behave the way they are perceived to behave. Not being directly
accessible to the senses, such principles appear to come from "outside"
the visible world. However, a great mistake is made if one concludes
from this, as the sophists do, that these principles come from outside
the universe itself. In fact, these principles, being universal, are
acting everywhere, at all times, and in every "infinitesimal" interval
of action, osculating the objects of sense as if tangent to the visible
domain.

It is this relationship between the observed motions of the objects of
sense, and the universal principles acting everywhere on them, that
Leibniz's differential calculus is designed to express. Through it, a
universal principle, as it is seen and unseen, is enfolded into a single
thought, showing us what is known, and indicating to us what is yet to
be discovered. A scientist who turns away, under Aristotle's, Sarpi's,
or Russell's, influence, from these objects of thought, to objects of
mere sense, is acting as if his own mind has ceased to exist, which, in
fact, it has.

Just as Riemann correctly asserts, that scientific physics began with
the invention of the differential calculus, it can be justly stated that
the differential calculus began with Cusa's excommunication of Aristotle
from science. While it is true that some of the methods of Leibniz's
calculus were beginning to develop in the work of Archytas and
Archimedes, this development was arrested when Aristotle's doctrines
became hegemonic in European culture, following the murder of Archimedes
by the Romans. Cusa reversed this disaster and reoriented European
science away from its obsession with objects of sense, and back to the
Pythagorean/Socratic focus on the idea.

Cusa insisted that perception is not caused by sensible things, but that
things are sensible because the mind has the power to sense. In turn,
the mind is able to sense, because it possesses a still higher faculty
of rationality; and it is able to rationalize because it possesses a
still higher faculty of intellect; and it is able to intellectualize
because man is created in the infinitesimal image of God.

From this standpoint, Cusa rejected Aristotle's sophism that less change
equals greater perfection, which made God a tyrannical force who keeps
the world perfect by opposing change. Instead, Cusa recognized that the
capacity for change in the physical universe, and in the human mind,
indicated the perfectability of both, and that it was God's intention to
perfect his Creation through the cognitive powers of Man. Thus, it is
the power of the mind to perceive change, not objects, through which Man
relates to the physical world and increases his knowledge of, and power
in, the universe.

Having freed science to recognize change as primary, Cusa concluded that
all physical action must be non-uniform, which Kepler experimentally
validated with his discovery that the principle of universal gravitation
produces harmonically-related elliptical orbits. As Kepler insisted, the
observed changing motion of the planet in its orbit, rather than an
apparent deviation from Aristotle's illusory idea of fixed perfection,
was, in reality, the intended effect of the principle of universal
gravitation, which is acting, universally, but whose effect differs, in
every infinitesimally small interval of action. In this respect, Kepler
likened the principle of universal gravitation to an idea, (using the
Latin word {species} to describe it), but distinguishing it from a human
idea, because it lacked the quality of willfulness unique to human
cognition. Man could grasp this idea, Kepler understood, by forming a
concept (thought-object), which expressed the physical action as a
consequence of a universal intention, analogous to, as Cusa emphasized,
the way human action is the consequence of human intention. While Kepler
made significant progress in creating geometrical expressions for this
relationship, he recognized the need for a new form of metaphor, and
demanded that future generations make further progress to this end.

It was Leibniz who defined the required concept, to which Riemann refers
as the beginning of scientific physics. Leibniz recognized that what was
required was a new form of mathematical expression, one that expressed
the relationship between the universal principle and its changing effect
on the observed motion. Most importantly, this new expression must work
in reverse, because that is the way it is encountered in scientific
investigation. That is, though the effect of the principle is perceived
through the motion, merely describing what is observed states nothing
about the principle. To scientifically know the cause of the motion, it
is necessary to express the motion as an effect of the principle.

To grasp this thought, Leibniz utilized a form of investigation that had
been previously developed by Cusa: the relationship of maximum and
minimum. As Cusa specified, the maximum and minimum coincide in God, but
in the created world the maximum and minimum appear as opposites. Thus,
to know any physical process, it is necessary to have a concept through
which the opposite extremes of that physical process are recognized as
the maximum and minimum effects of a single, unified, intention. For
example, in every interval of an elliptical orbit, the planet's motion
is different at the two extremes of that interval, no matter how small
an interval is taken. There are but two exceptions. One is the entire
orbit, the other is the moment of change itself, which comprise,
respectively, the maximum and minimum effect of the principle of
universal gravitation on the planet. In the minimum, the universal
principle's effect is always different, but it is differing according to
a well-defined principle. The mathematical expression of this
differentiation, Leibniz called "the differential" which always exists
integrated into the whole action. In the latter form, its mathematical
expression, was called by Leibniz, "the integral".

From this relationship, Leibniz invented a type of animation, which he
called "differential equations", in which the maximum effect is
expressed as a function of the minimum. As Riemann noted, this put
science on a completely new footing, for in experimental investigations
it is the minimum expression that is measured, from which the maximum
must be determined, as, for example, in the case of Leibniz's and
Bernoulli's determination of the catenary, Gauss's determination of the
orbit of Ceres, or, Gauss's or Riemann's investigations in geodesy,
geomagnetism, electromagnetism and shock waves. With Leibniz's
differential calculus, such investigations could be undertaken, for the
first time, with the necessary epistemological rigor.

Of course, Leibniz's differential equations do not express the principle
directly. But, they can express the changing effect of the principle at
every moment. On this basis, the principle, can be known by inversion,
as that idea which produces the effect expressed by the differential
equation. To emphasize the point: the differential equation is not the
principle, but it expresses the ever changing footprints that the
principle leaves on the visible domain. While this description, clothed
in either words or geometry, is necessarily ironic, the thought-object
to which it refers, is recognized, in the mind, with absolute precision.

It is crucial to emphasize that Leibniz's calculus is a mathematical
expression of a physical idea. As is obvious with respect to physical
action, the differential and the integral express the minimum and
maximum effect of the same universal physical principle. Yet the
empiricists attacked Leibniz's calculus by abstracting it from physics
and presenting it only as a mathematical formalism. They produced
through sophistry, an apparent mathematical paradox, by treating both as
if they existed separately from the physical principle they expressed.
From this formal mathematical standpoint, the sophist argued, the
differential does not exist, because in the moment of change, the time
elapsed and distance traversed are both, formally, null. From this, the
sophistry continues, the integral can't be expressed, because it is the
sum of infinitely many null magnitudes.

Leibniz countered this sophistry by always insisting on the physical
nature of his calculus. In a 1702 letter to Varignon, he posed the
following paradox to the algebraists:

Construct two similar triangles from the intersection of two lines. (See
Figure 1.)

![](%20riemann59.gif){.size-full .wp-image-813 height="218" width="400"}

In the construction, the legs of the large triangle are in the same
proportion to each other, as the legs of the smaller one. Now, move the
oblique line in a motion parallel to its original position. (See
animated Figure 2.)

![](%20riemann59.gif){.size-full .wp-image-814 height="218" width="400"}

Under this motion, the smaller triangle gets smaller while the larger
triangle gets bigger, but the proportionality of their sides remains the
same. At some moment, the smaller triangle passes through the point of
intersection of the two original lines, emerging, in the next moment, on
the other side, to begin growing again.

The algebraists insisted that, at the moment that the small triangle
passed through the point, its sides both appeared to be null, and so it
is impossible to express their proportion, or more absurdly, that their
proportion ceased to exist at that moment. Leibniz countered that the
triangle passed through that point as the result of a physical motion,
intended to maintain the proportionality of the sides of the triangles.
Consequently, it was the motion that produced the constant
proportionality, as its intended effect. At the moment the small
triangle passed through the point, the motion did not cease and, thus,
neither did the proportionality of the triangles. That proportionality
reflected a principle of physical action which is known, in the mind, by
a thought-object associated with a certain intention. The point is but a
moment in the motion. It does not exist without respect to the physical
action. Only when the mathematical expression is separated from the
physical action, does the algebraic contradiction appear. The appearance
of such a contradiction may indicate a problem with the thinking of the
empiricist, but the problem lies only there, not in the physical
universe itself.

Conversely, to insist that the algebraic contradiction has an
ontological significance, is to induce a state of mental disassociation
in the mind of the scientist. This is precisely the intention of Euler,
Lagrange, and especially Cauchy, who replaced Leibniz's idea of the
infinitesimal with Cauchy's idea of the limit. Cauchy argued that the
limit removed the algebraic contradiction of the infinitesimal. But in
doing so, Cauchy was actually inducing insanity, by removing the
connection of the mind to the physical universe in which it exists.
This, of course, was his intended effect.

That the cognitive capacity of the mind was the real target of the
oligarchy's attack on Leibniz's calculus, was confessed to a popular
audience by Richard Courant and Herbert Robbins in their English
language 1941 book, {What is Mathematics}:

"...the very foundations of the calculus were long obscured by an
unwillingness to recognize the exclusive right of the limit concept as
the source of the new methods. Neither Newton nor Leibniz coudl bring
himself to such a clear-cut attitude, simple as it appears to us now
that the limit concept has been completely clarified. Their example
dominated more than a century of mathematical development during which
the subject was shrouded by talk of \`infinitely small quantities',
\`differentials',\`ultimate ratios' etc. {the reluctance with which
these concepts were finally abandoned was deeply rooted in the
philosophical attitude of the time and in the very nature of the human
mind}" (emphasis added, poor punctuation in the original bmd.).

The empiricist sees objects in motion and imagines them to move in a
space that is as empty as he believes his own mind to be. A scientist
envisions a manifold of universal physical principles, embodied as
animated objects of thought that enliven the objects before his eyes. To
the former, change is an annoying inconvenience that disrupts his
ultimately futile attempts to maintain his accepted axiomatic-formal
structure. To the latter, change is the happy indicator of the moving
effect of universal principles acting, universally, yet differently, at
all infinitesimal intervals of time and space.

The Differential Calculus Animated

The most effective pedagogical means to illuminate Leibniz's concept of
the differential calculus, is through a series of animations that
illustrate its application from Kepler, to Huygens, to Leibniz, to
Gauss, to Riemann. In what follows, we rely on the animations to do most
of the talking, with these written words providing only the barest of
stage directions:

Animated Figure 3: Kepler's principle of equal areas. Kepler conceived
of the orbital path as the changing effect of the principle of universal
gravitation, which varied inversely to the distance between the sun and
the planet. Kepler understood the motion in any interval to be the sum
of the infinitely many changing radial distances within that interval,
which reflected the planet's motion at every moment. He could not
calculate this sum precisely, but he recognized the result corresponded
to the area swept out (See animated figure 3a.),

![](%20riemann59.gif){.size-full .wp-image-815 height="290" width="300"}

which he measured through his famous method of the three anomalies. (see
animated figure 3b.)

![](%20riemann59.gif){.size-full .wp-image-816 height="300" width="300"}

Kepler's method of calculation led to the paradox which prompted Leibniz
to develop his concept of the differential and the integral.

Animated Figure 4: Huygens attempted to tackle the problem of
non-uniform motion by expressing one non-uniform motion as a function of
another, by the method of involute and evolute. In animated figure 4a
the yellow curve is formed by the motion of unwrapping the white string
from blue curve.

![](%20riemann59.gif){.size-full .wp-image-817 height="303" width="400"}

The yellow curve is called the involute. The blue curve is called the
evolute. Thus, the changing curvature of the involute is a function of
the changing curvature of the evolute. The white string is always
perpendicular to the involute and always tangent to the evolute. Because
of this, the involute is the envelope of circles whose centers all lie
on the evolute. (See animated figure 4b, 4c.)

![](%20riemann59.gif){.size-full .wp-image-818 height="424" width="400"}
![](%20riemann59.gif){.size-full .wp-image-819 height="424" width="400"}

In other words, these circles are everywhere tangent (osculating) to the
involute, and their radii are everywhere tangent to the evolute. Thus,
the curvature of the involute expresses the effect of the principles
acting tangentially on the evolute and vice versa.

Now, instead of thinking about these osculating circles being formed by
the curves, think of the curves being formed by the osculating action of
a circle whose size and position are changing according to a principle
of motion. (see animated figure 4d.)

![](%20riemann59.gif){.size-full .wp-image-820 height="424" width="400"}

In this way, the curves are more truthfully understood, as the intended
effect of a principle of change that is acting, everywhere tangent, to
their visible expression.

Huygens used this relationship to build his famous pendulum clock, on
the principle that the cycloid had both the property that its involute
was another cycloid, and that it was the curve of equal-time for a body
falling according to gravity. (See animations 4e,4f,4g,4h.)

![](%20riemann59.gif){.size-full .wp-image-821 height="267" width="400"}

![](%20riemann59.gif){.size-full .wp-image-822 height="300" width="400"}

![](%20riemann59.gif){.size-full .wp-image-823 height="406" width="400"}

![](%20riemann59.gif){.size-full .wp-image-824 height="406" width="400"}

Animated Figure 5: While Huygens's method of the involute and evolute
expresses non- uniform motion, it relies on a purely mechanical
procedure, instead of expressing a principle of change directly. Leibniz
solved this problem by expressing this principle of change through
differential equations. To measure the differential, Leibniz projected
the changing action in the infinitesimally small into the visible
domain, in a manner similar to Plato's cave metaphor. To do this,
Leibniz generalized the investigations of Fermat by defining a series of
functions that depended on the changing curvature that resulted from the
physical action. (See figure 5a.)

![](%20riemann59.gif){.size-full .wp-image-825 height="342" width="400"}

In particular, Leibniz investigated the motion of the subtangent, whose
length is a function of the direction of the tangent, which in turn is
function of the changing curvature. Leibniz considered the triangle
formed between the point of tangency , the intersection of the ordinate
with the axis, and the intersection of the tangent with the axis, as a
projection into the visible domain, of the changing action in the
infinitesimally small.

To get an intuitive grasp of this method, take the example of the
parabola (See animated figure 5b )

![](%20riemann59.gif){.size-full .wp-image-826 height="342" width="400"}

which illustrates the changing motion of the parabola's subtangent.
Fermat had shown that the subtangent of the parabola is always twice the
distance of the abscissa to the vertex. From this standpoint, the
parabola can be entirely defined as the effect of a principle of change.
Instead of thinking of the subtangent as a function of the parabola,
think of the effect of the parabola as a function of a subtangent which
is always bisected by its vertex, which, in turn, is defined as the
point at which the subtangent is at its minimum. This way of thinking is
a very elementary, pedagogical description of a "differential equation".

From this standpoint, Leibniz was able to discover the existence of
physical principles that were not expressed by the visible form of the
motion, but {were} expressed through the characteristics of differential
equations. For example, the visible shape of the exponential curve can
be defined as the curve produced by a continuous motion that is
arithmetic in one direction, and geometric in a perpendicular direction.
(See animated figure 5c.)

![](%20riemann59.gif){.size-full .wp-image-827 height="400" width="259"}

Yet, there is a unique property to this action, which Leibniz found
through his infinitesimal calculus. The exponential curve is the curve
whose subtangent is always constant. (See animated figure 5d.)

![](%20riemann59.gif){.size-full .wp-image-828 height="340" width="400"}

In other words, the exponential curve is the curve whose characteristic
of change is the same as itself!

This discovery highlights a crucial distinction between Leibniz's method
and Huygens'. With respect to the involute and evolute, the cycloid is
the curve whose change is the same as itself. But from the more general
method of Leibniz, it is the exponential curve that exhibits a
characteristic of self-similarity. The importance of this distinction is
underscored by Leibniz's discovery of the relationship between the
exponential curve and the catenary, which highlights the fact that the
catenary expresses, more universally, the principle of least-action, not
the cycloid.

As a result of this investigation, Leibniz discovered an entirely new
type of transcendental function. He realized that even though every
exponential had constant subtangents, the absolute length varied with
the constant of proportionality. Leibniz found the existence of a new
number, which he called, "b", which forms the exponential curve whose
subtangent is equal to unity. (See figure 5e.)

![](%20riemann59.gif){.size-full .wp-image-829 height="340" width="400"}

(Euler later changed the name of this number to "e", whose historically
misleading and quasi-blasphemous moniker it still wears today.)

With this new power to investigate physical action as the effect of a
principle of change, new characteristics are brought to the surface that
otherwise had remained hidden. For example, when the apparently uniform
circular action is investigated from the standpoint of change of its
subtangent, the existence of two discontinuities emerge, that otherwise
were not visible. This is where the subtangent becomes infinite, which
correspond, in Gauss's idea, to the /-1 and -/-1. (See animated figure
5f.)

![](%20riemann59.gif){.size-full .wp-image-830 height="124" width="400"}
:::

::: {.addtoany_share_save_container .addtoany_content_bottom}
::: {.a2a_kit .a2a_kit_size_32 .addtoany_list a2a-url="http://lymcanada.org/59/" a2a-title="Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 59 :  Think Infinitesimal"}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F59%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2059%20%3A%20%20Think%20Infinitesimal "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F59%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2059%20%3A%20%20Think%20Infinitesimal "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/google_plus?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F59%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2059%20%3A%20%20Think%20Infinitesimal "Google+"){.a2a_button_google_plus}
[](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd .addtoany_share_save}
:::
:::
:::

[ [ Posted on ]{.screen-reader-text} [February 20, 2010 February 24,
2019](http://lymcanada.org/59/) ]{.posted-on} [ [ [ Author
]{.screen-reader-text} [Bruce
Director](http://lymcanada.org/author/bdirector/){.url .fn .n} ]{.author
.vcard} ]{.byline} [ [ Categories ]{.screen-reader-text}
[EN](http://lymcanada.org/category/en/) , [Riemmann for
Anti-Dummies](http://lymcanada.org/category/science-1/c132-riemmann-for-anti-dummies/)
]{.cat-links}

::: post-thumbnail
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part59_files_afigure01%20riemann59.gif){.attachment-post-thumbnail
.size-post-thumbnail .wp-post-image width="400" height="218"}
:::

::: entry-header
# Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 59 : Think Infinitesimal {#riemann-for-anti-dummies-part-59-think-infinitesimal-1 .entry-title}
:::

::: entry-content
::: pf-content
## Think Infinitesimal

by Bruce Director

"It is well known that scientific physics has existed only since the
invention of the differential calculus," stated Bernhard Riemann in his
introduction to his late 1854 lecture series posthumously published
under the title, "Partial Differential Equations and their Applications
to Physical Questions". For most of his listeners, Riemann's statement
would have been fairly straight forward, for they understood the
physical significance of Leibniz's calculus as it had percolated over
the preceding sesquicentury through the work of Kaestner and Gauss. A
far different condition exists, however, for most of today's readers,
whose education has been dominated by the empiricism of the
Leibniz-hating Euler, Cauchy and Russell. While such victims might find
the formal content of Riemann's statement agreeable, its true intention
would be as obscure to them as the Gospel of John and Epistles of Paul
are to Karl Rove and his legions of true believers.

The empiricist will not understand Riemann's statement, for the simple
reason that what he associates with the words "differential calculus" is
a completely different idea than what Riemann and Leibniz had in mind.
To the victim of today's empiricist-dominated educational system, the
infinitesimal calculus concerns only a set of rules for mathematical
formalism. But to the scientist, the infinitesimal calculus is a kind of
Socratic dialogue, through which man transcends the limitations of
sense-perception and discovers those universal principles that govern
all physical action.

The empiricist rejects Leibniz's notion, because he accepts Aristotle's
doctrine that "physics concerns only objects of sense", whereas Plato,
Cusa, Leibniz and Riemann emphasized, physics concerns objects of
{thought}. These thought-objects, or "Geistesmassen" as Riemann called
them, refer to the universal principles which {cause} the objects of
sense to behave the way they are perceived to behave. Not being directly
accessible to the senses, such principles appear to come from "outside"
the visible world. However, a great mistake is made if one concludes
from this, as the sophists do, that these principles come from outside
the universe itself. In fact, these principles, being universal, are
acting everywhere, at all times, and in every "infinitesimal" interval
of action, osculating the objects of sense as if tangent to the visible
domain.

It is this relationship between the observed motions of the objects of
sense, and the universal principles acting everywhere on them, that
Leibniz's differential calculus is designed to express. Through it, a
universal principle, as it is seen and unseen, is enfolded into a single
thought, showing us what is known, and indicating to us what is yet to
be discovered. A scientist who turns away, under Aristotle's, Sarpi's,
or Russell's, influence, from these objects of thought, to objects of
mere sense, is acting as if his own mind has ceased to exist, which, in
fact, it has.

Just as Riemann correctly asserts, that scientific physics began with
the invention of the differential calculus, it can be justly stated that
the differential calculus began with Cusa's excommunication of Aristotle
from science. While it is true that some of the methods of Leibniz's
calculus were beginning to develop in the work of Archytas and
Archimedes, this development was arrested when Aristotle's doctrines
became hegemonic in European culture, following the murder of Archimedes
by the Romans. Cusa reversed this disaster and reoriented European
science away from its obsession with objects of sense, and back to the
Pythagorean/Socratic focus on the idea.

Cusa insisted that perception is not caused by sensible things, but that
things are sensible because the mind has the power to sense. In turn,
the mind is able to sense, because it possesses a still higher faculty
of rationality; and it is able to rationalize because it possesses a
still higher faculty of intellect; and it is able to intellectualize
because man is created in the infinitesimal image of God.

From this standpoint, Cusa rejected Aristotle's sophism that less change
equals greater perfection, which made God a tyrannical force who keeps
the world perfect by opposing change. Instead, Cusa recognized that the
capacity for change in the physical universe, and in the human mind,
indicated the perfectability of both, and that it was God's intention to
perfect his Creation through the cognitive powers of Man. Thus, it is
the power of the mind to perceive change, not objects, through which Man
relates to the physical world and increases his knowledge of, and power
in, the universe.

Having freed science to recognize change as primary, Cusa concluded that
all physical action must be non-uniform, which Kepler experimentally
validated with his discovery that the principle of universal gravitation
produces harmonically-related elliptical orbits. As Kepler insisted, the
observed changing motion of the planet in its orbit, rather than an
apparent deviation from Aristotle's illusory idea of fixed perfection,
was, in reality, the intended effect of the principle of universal
gravitation, which is acting, universally, but whose effect differs, in
every infinitesimally small interval of action. In this respect, Kepler
likened the principle of universal gravitation to an idea, (using the
Latin word {species} to describe it), but distinguishing it from a human
idea, because it lacked the quality of willfulness unique to human
cognition. Man could grasp this idea, Kepler understood, by forming a
concept (thought-object), which expressed the physical action as a
consequence of a universal intention, analogous to, as Cusa emphasized,
the way human action is the consequence of human intention. While Kepler
made significant progress in creating geometrical expressions for this
relationship, he recognized the need for a new form of metaphor, and
demanded that future generations make further progress to this end.

It was Leibniz who defined the required concept, to which Riemann refers
as the beginning of scientific physics. Leibniz recognized that what was
required was a new form of mathematical expression, one that expressed
the relationship between the universal principle and its changing effect
on the observed motion. Most importantly, this new expression must work
in reverse, because that is the way it is encountered in scientific
investigation. That is, though the effect of the principle is perceived
through the motion, merely describing what is observed states nothing
about the principle. To scientifically know the cause of the motion, it
is necessary to express the motion as an effect of the principle.

To grasp this thought, Leibniz utilized a form of investigation that had
been previously developed by Cusa: the relationship of maximum and
minimum. As Cusa specified, the maximum and minimum coincide in God, but
in the created world the maximum and minimum appear as opposites. Thus,
to know any physical process, it is necessary to have a concept through
which the opposite extremes of that physical process are recognized as
the maximum and minimum effects of a single, unified, intention. For
example, in every interval of an elliptical orbit, the planet's motion
is different at the two extremes of that interval, no matter how small
an interval is taken. There are but two exceptions. One is the entire
orbit, the other is the moment of change itself, which comprise,
respectively, the maximum and minimum effect of the principle of
universal gravitation on the planet. In the minimum, the universal
principle's effect is always different, but it is differing according to
a well-defined principle. The mathematical expression of this
differentiation, Leibniz called "the differential" which always exists
integrated into the whole action. In the latter form, its mathematical
expression, was called by Leibniz, "the integral".

From this relationship, Leibniz invented a type of animation, which he
called "differential equations", in which the maximum effect is
expressed as a function of the minimum. As Riemann noted, this put
science on a completely new footing, for in experimental investigations
it is the minimum expression that is measured, from which the maximum
must be determined, as, for example, in the case of Leibniz's and
Bernoulli's determination of the catenary, Gauss's determination of the
orbit of Ceres, or, Gauss's or Riemann's investigations in geodesy,
geomagnetism, electromagnetism and shock waves. With Leibniz's
differential calculus, such investigations could be undertaken, for the
first time, with the necessary epistemological rigor.

Of course, Leibniz's differential equations do not express the principle
directly. But, they can express the changing effect of the principle at
every moment. On this basis, the principle, can be known by inversion,
as that idea which produces the effect expressed by the differential
equation. To emphasize the point: the differential equation is not the
principle, but it expresses the ever changing footprints that the
principle leaves on the visible domain. While this description, clothed
in either words or geometry, is necessarily ironic, the thought-object
to which it refers, is recognized, in the mind, with absolute precision.

It is crucial to emphasize that Leibniz's calculus is a mathematical
expression of a physical idea. As is obvious with respect to physical
action, the differential and the integral express the minimum and
maximum effect of the same universal physical principle. Yet the
empiricists attacked Leibniz's calculus by abstracting it from physics
and presenting it only as a mathematical formalism. They produced
through sophistry, an apparent mathematical paradox, by treating both as
if they existed separately from the physical principle they expressed.
From this formal mathematical standpoint, the sophist argued, the
differential does not exist, because in the moment of change, the time
elapsed and distance traversed are both, formally, null. From this, the
sophistry continues, the integral can't be expressed, because it is the
sum of infinitely many null magnitudes.

Leibniz countered this sophistry by always insisting on the physical
nature of his calculus. In a 1702 letter to Varignon, he posed the
following paradox to the algebraists:

Construct two similar triangles from the intersection of two lines. (See
Figure 1.)

![](%20riemann59.gif){.size-full .wp-image-813 height="218" width="400"}

In the construction, the legs of the large triangle are in the same
proportion to each other, as the legs of the smaller one. Now, move the
oblique line in a motion parallel to its original position. (See
animated Figure 2.)

![](%20riemann59.gif){.size-full .wp-image-814 height="218" width="400"}

Under this motion, the smaller triangle gets smaller while the larger
triangle gets bigger, but the proportionality of their sides remains the
same. At some moment, the smaller triangle passes through the point of
intersection of the two original lines, emerging, in the next moment, on
the other side, to begin growing again.

The algebraists insisted that, at the moment that the small triangle
passed through the point, its sides both appeared to be null, and so it
is impossible to express their proportion, or more absurdly, that their
proportion ceased to exist at that moment. Leibniz countered that the
triangle passed through that point as the result of a physical motion,
intended to maintain the proportionality of the sides of the triangles.
Consequently, it was the motion that produced the constant
proportionality, as its intended effect. At the moment the small
triangle passed through the point, the motion did not cease and, thus,
neither did the proportionality of the triangles. That proportionality
reflected a principle of physical action which is known, in the mind, by
a thought-object associated with a certain intention. The point is but a
moment in the motion. It does not exist without respect to the physical
action. Only when the mathematical expression is separated from the
physical action, does the algebraic contradiction appear. The appearance
of such a contradiction may indicate a problem with the thinking of the
empiricist, but the problem lies only there, not in the physical
universe itself.

Conversely, to insist that the algebraic contradiction has an
ontological significance, is to induce a state of mental disassociation
in the mind of the scientist. This is precisely the intention of Euler,
Lagrange, and especially Cauchy, who replaced Leibniz's idea of the
infinitesimal with Cauchy's idea of the limit. Cauchy argued that the
limit removed the algebraic contradiction of the infinitesimal. But in
doing so, Cauchy was actually inducing insanity, by removing the
connection of the mind to the physical universe in which it exists.
This, of course, was his intended effect.

That the cognitive capacity of the mind was the real target of the
oligarchy's attack on Leibniz's calculus, was confessed to a popular
audience by Richard Courant and Herbert Robbins in their English
language 1941 book, {What is Mathematics}:

"...the very foundations of the calculus were long obscured by an
unwillingness to recognize the exclusive right of the limit concept as
the source of the new methods. Neither Newton nor Leibniz coudl bring
himself to such a clear-cut attitude, simple as it appears to us now
that the limit concept has been completely clarified. Their example
dominated more than a century of mathematical development during which
the subject was shrouded by talk of \`infinitely small quantities',
\`differentials',\`ultimate ratios' etc. {the reluctance with which
these concepts were finally abandoned was deeply rooted in the
philosophical attitude of the time and in the very nature of the human
mind}" (emphasis added, poor punctuation in the original bmd.).

The empiricist sees objects in motion and imagines them to move in a
space that is as empty as he believes his own mind to be. A scientist
envisions a manifold of universal physical principles, embodied as
animated objects of thought that enliven the objects before his eyes. To
the former, change is an annoying inconvenience that disrupts his
ultimately futile attempts to maintain his accepted axiomatic-formal
structure. To the latter, change is the happy indicator of the moving
effect of universal principles acting, universally, yet differently, at
all infinitesimal intervals of time and space.

The Differential Calculus Animated

The most effective pedagogical means to illuminate Leibniz's concept of
the differential calculus, is through a series of animations that
illustrate its application from Kepler, to Huygens, to Leibniz, to
Gauss, to Riemann. In what follows, we rely on the animations to do most
of the talking, with these written words providing only the barest of
stage directions:

Animated Figure 3: Kepler's principle of equal areas. Kepler conceived
of the orbital path as the changing effect of the principle of universal
gravitation, which varied inversely to the distance between the sun and
the planet. Kepler understood the motion in any interval to be the sum
of the infinitely many changing radial distances within that interval,
which reflected the planet's motion at every moment. He could not
calculate this sum precisely, but he recognized the result corresponded
to the area swept out (See animated figure 3a.),

![](%20riemann59.gif){.size-full .wp-image-815 height="290" width="300"}

which he measured through his famous method of the three anomalies. (see
animated figure 3b.)

![](%20riemann59.gif){.size-full .wp-image-816 height="300" width="300"}

Kepler's method of calculation led to the paradox which prompted Leibniz
to develop his concept of the differential and the integral.

Animated Figure 4: Huygens attempted to tackle the problem of
non-uniform motion by expressing one non-uniform motion as a function of
another, by the method of involute and evolute. In animated figure 4a
the yellow curve is formed by the motion of unwrapping the white string
from blue curve.

![](%20riemann59.gif){.size-full .wp-image-817 height="303" width="400"}

The yellow curve is called the involute. The blue curve is called the
evolute. Thus, the changing curvature of the involute is a function of
the changing curvature of the evolute. The white string is always
perpendicular to the involute and always tangent to the evolute. Because
of this, the involute is the envelope of circles whose centers all lie
on the evolute. (See animated figure 4b, 4c.)

![](%20riemann59.gif){.size-full .wp-image-818 height="424" width="400"}
![](%20riemann59.gif){.size-full .wp-image-819 height="424" width="400"}

In other words, these circles are everywhere tangent (osculating) to the
involute, and their radii are everywhere tangent to the evolute. Thus,
the curvature of the involute expresses the effect of the principles
acting tangentially on the evolute and vice versa.

Now, instead of thinking about these osculating circles being formed by
the curves, think of the curves being formed by the osculating action of
a circle whose size and position are changing according to a principle
of motion. (see animated figure 4d.)

![](%20riemann59.gif){.size-full .wp-image-820 height="424" width="400"}

In this way, the curves are more truthfully understood, as the intended
effect of a principle of change that is acting, everywhere tangent, to
their visible expression.

Huygens used this relationship to build his famous pendulum clock, on
the principle that the cycloid had both the property that its involute
was another cycloid, and that it was the curve of equal-time for a body
falling according to gravity. (See animations 4e,4f,4g,4h.)

![](%20riemann59.gif){.size-full .wp-image-821 height="267" width="400"}

![](%20riemann59.gif){.size-full .wp-image-822 height="300" width="400"}

![](%20riemann59.gif){.size-full .wp-image-823 height="406" width="400"}

![](%20riemann59.gif){.size-full .wp-image-824 height="406" width="400"}

Animated Figure 5: While Huygens's method of the involute and evolute
expresses non- uniform motion, it relies on a purely mechanical
procedure, instead of expressing a principle of change directly. Leibniz
solved this problem by expressing this principle of change through
differential equations. To measure the differential, Leibniz projected
the changing action in the infinitesimally small into the visible
domain, in a manner similar to Plato's cave metaphor. To do this,
Leibniz generalized the investigations of Fermat by defining a series of
functions that depended on the changing curvature that resulted from the
physical action. (See figure 5a.)

![](%20riemann59.gif){.size-full .wp-image-825 height="342" width="400"}

In particular, Leibniz investigated the motion of the subtangent, whose
length is a function of the direction of the tangent, which in turn is
function of the changing curvature. Leibniz considered the triangle
formed between the point of tangency , the intersection of the ordinate
with the axis, and the intersection of the tangent with the axis, as a
projection into the visible domain, of the changing action in the
infinitesimally small.

To get an intuitive grasp of this method, take the example of the
parabola (See animated figure 5b )

![](%20riemann59.gif){.size-full .wp-image-826 height="342" width="400"}

which illustrates the changing motion of the parabola's subtangent.
Fermat had shown that the subtangent of the parabola is always twice the
distance of the abscissa to the vertex. From this standpoint, the
parabola can be entirely defined as the effect of a principle of change.
Instead of thinking of the subtangent as a function of the parabola,
think of the effect of the parabola as a function of a subtangent which
is always bisected by its vertex, which, in turn, is defined as the
point at which the subtangent is at its minimum. This way of thinking is
a very elementary, pedagogical description of a "differential equation".

From this standpoint, Leibniz was able to discover the existence of
physical principles that were not expressed by the visible form of the
motion, but {were} expressed through the characteristics of differential
equations. For example, the visible shape of the exponential curve can
be defined as the curve produced by a continuous motion that is
arithmetic in one direction, and geometric in a perpendicular direction.
(See animated figure 5c.)

![](%20riemann59.gif){.size-full .wp-image-827 height="400" width="259"}

Yet, there is a unique property to this action, which Leibniz found
through his infinitesimal calculus. The exponential curve is the curve
whose subtangent is always constant. (See animated figure 5d.)

![](%20riemann59.gif){.size-full .wp-image-828 height="340" width="400"}

In other words, the exponential curve is the curve whose characteristic
of change is the same as itself!

This discovery highlights a crucial distinction between Leibniz's method
and Huygens'. With respect to the involute and evolute, the cycloid is
the curve whose change is the same as itself. But from the more general
method of Leibniz, it is the exponential curve that exhibits a
characteristic of self-similarity. The importance of this distinction is
underscored by Leibniz's discovery of the relationship between the
exponential curve and the catenary, which highlights the fact that the
catenary expresses, more universally, the principle of least-action, not
the cycloid.

As a result of this investigation, Leibniz discovered an entirely new
type of transcendental function. He realized that even though every
exponential had constant subtangents, the absolute length varied with
the constant of proportionality. Leibniz found the existence of a new
number, which he called, "b", which forms the exponential curve whose
subtangent is equal to unity. (See figure 5e.)

![](%20riemann59.gif){.size-full .wp-image-829 height="340" width="400"}

(Euler later changed the name of this number to "e", whose historically
misleading and quasi-blasphemous moniker it still wears today.)

With this new power to investigate physical action as the effect of a
principle of change, new characteristics are brought to the surface that
otherwise had remained hidden. For example, when the apparently uniform
circular action is investigated from the standpoint of change of its
subtangent, the existence of two discontinuities emerge, that otherwise
were not visible. This is where the subtangent becomes infinite, which
correspond, in Gauss's idea, to the /-1 and -/-1. (See animated figure
5f.)

![](%20riemann59.gif){.size-full .wp-image-830 height="124" width="400"}
:::

::: {.addtoany_share_save_container .addtoany_content_bottom}
::: {.a2a_kit .a2a_kit_size_32 .addtoany_list a2a-url="http://lymcanada.org/59/" a2a-title="Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 59 :  Think Infinitesimal"}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F59%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2059%20%3A%20%20Think%20Infinitesimal "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F59%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2059%20%3A%20%20Think%20Infinitesimal "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/google_plus?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F59%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2059%20%3A%20%20Think%20Infinitesimal "Google+"){.a2a_button_google_plus}
[](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd .addtoany_share_save}
:::
:::
:::

[ [ Posted on ]{.screen-reader-text} [February 20, 2010 February 24,
2019](http://lymcanada.org/59/) ]{.posted-on} [ [ [ Author
]{.screen-reader-text} [Bruce
Director](http://lymcanada.org/author/bdirector/){.url .fn .n} ]{.author
.vcard} ]{.byline} [ [ Categories ]{.screen-reader-text}
[EN](http://lymcanada.org/category/en/) , [Riemmann for
Anti-Dummies](http://lymcanada.org/category/science-1/c132-riemmann-for-anti-dummies/)
]{.cat-links}
