::: post-thumbnail
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.attachment-post-thumbnail
.size-post-thumbnail .wp-post-image width="300" height="396"
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part60_files_part60figure01.gif"}

\<img width=\"300\" height=\"396\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part60_files_part60figure01.gif\"
class=\"attachment-post-thumbnail size-post-thumbnail wp-post-image\"
alt=\"\" />
:::

::: entry-header
# Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 60 : The Power To Change, Change {#riemann-for-anti-dummies-part-60-the-power-to-change-change .entry-title}
:::

::: entry-content
::: pf-content
## The Power to Change, Change {#the-power-to-change-change style="text-align: left;"}

New ideas, like people, come into this world naked. To effectively
perform their mission, they must be provided with clothes. But unlike
children who can speak for themselves, ideas must be dressed in words
and images which, upon careful reflection, indicate how they were
conceived. And though it would be a grave error to mistake a person's
substance for his or her outward appearance, the spirit of an idea
(which also cannot be captured by a superficial account of its form)
can, nevertheless, be evoked by that form's animation. Yet there are
those for whom the generation of such thoughts had seemed impossible,
and to whom the very existence of such creations signifies a power they
had denied could be. They focus only on the form, gossiping about its
appearance, chiding its unconventionality or smothering it with an
effusive description of its external features.

The history of science is replete with examples of such new creatures,
which have been defended from such sophistries by their authors' careful
constructions: Archytas's solution for the doubling of the cube, or
Gauss's complex surfaces, to name but two of those reviewed in previous
installments of this series. Though such constructions arise as the
unexpected solutions to specific problems, they embody the powerful new
thoughts which made such solutions possible. Thus, their recreation
evokes that more general principle, which, though forever connected to
its origins, emerges as a new universal idea, and gains for all time, a
universal increase in the cognitive power of man.

Now we turn our attention to another such creation, previously
mentioned, but not yet adequately developed in this forum: the
hypothesis which lies at the foundations of Riemann's surface.

Riemann first presented to the world his new idea in his doctoral
dissertation of 1851, and elaborated its implications in his 1854
habilitation lecture, his 1857 treatises on Abelian and hypergeometric
functions, and his posthumously published philosophical fragments. From
all these sources, and the historical context in which they were
produced, we can reconstruct Riemann's new idea as the solution to the
unresolved physical paradoxes brought to the fore by C.F. Gauss's
extension of Leibniz's calculus into the complex domain.

But from this exercise we acquire much more. As we form Riemann's
surfaces in our mind as images, we begin to recognize the quality of
mind which produced this solution, and a more universal thought takes
shape as well. From this point forward these images evoke in our minds
that universal thought. Thus, we can bring Riemann's creation to life,
not simply as a solution to a formal mathematical problem, as its
outward appearance is most frequently portrayed, but as an expression of
an epistemological concept that has revolutionized human thinking.

**What is a Surface?**

When Riemann and Gauss speak of surfaces, they do not mean visible
objects embedded in a linearly-extended Euclidean-type space. Rather,
they speak of what Riemann identified in his 1854 habilitation paper as
"multiply-extended continuous manifolds." Such manifolds are not defined
by a set of a priori axiomatic assumptions, but are concepts arising
from an investigation of physical action determined by universal
physical principles.

"In a concept whose various modes of determination form a continuous
manifold, if one passes in a definite way from one mode of determination
to another, the modes of determination which are traversed constitute a
simply extended manifold and its essential mark is this, that in it, a
continuous progress is possible from any point only in two directions,
forward and backward. If now one forms the thought of this manifold
again passing over into another entirely different, here again in a
definite way, that is, in such a way that every point goes over into a
definite point of the other, then will all the modes of determination
thus obtained form a doubly extended manifold. In similar procedure one
obtains a triply extended manifold when one represents to oneself that a
double extension passes over in a definite way into one entirely
different, and it is easy to see how one can prolong this construction
indefinitely. If one considers his object of thought as variable instead
of regarding the concept as determinable, then this construction can be
characterized as a synthesis of a variability of "n + 1" dimensions out
of a variability of "n" dimensions and a variability of one dimension."
(Riemann's Habilitation Lecture)

Before continuing with this more general investigation of multiply
extended manifolds, let us take as an example, the specific cases of the
catenary and the catenoid.

As was illustrated in the last installment of this series, Leibniz,
through his infinitesimal differential calculus, created a means to
express physical action as the intended effect of a universal physical
principle that is acting, universally, but differently, at every
infinitesimal interval of time and space. In the case of the catenary,
this is expressed by the fact that the visible shape of the catenary is
determined by the changing effect of the physical principle of
least-action on a chain supporting its own weight. Though this effect is
different at each point along the catenary curve, these differences are
determined by that general principle which integrates them so as to
produce a physically stable chain.

Now, compare this case with that of the surface of a catenoid, formed,
for example, by a soap film suspended between two circular hoops. [(See
Figure 1.)](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure01.gif)

+:----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **Figure 1**                                                          |
|                                                                       |
| ![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/p                                 |
| lugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http:// |
| lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure01.gif"} |
| \<img                                                                 |
| src=\"http://                                                         |
| lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure01.gif\" |
| alt=\"\" />                                                           |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

Here the soap film is suspended between the hoops along catenary curves,
but this family of catenaries are themselves integrated, along circular
pathways, into a surface. Thus, like the catenary, the visible shape of
the catenoid is determined by the changing effect of the physical
principle of least action, but instead of those changes varying only
along one curve, as in the case of the catenary, those differences occur
within a rotational manifold of catenary curves. Therefore, the general
principle that determines the stable shape of the soap film is expressed
as the integrated effect that unites these two distinct but connected
types of differences under one, higher principle.

From the standpoint of Riemann's habilitation lecture cited above, the
catenary comes under his concept of a simply extended manifold, whereas,
the catenoid is a type of doubly extended manifold. Using Leibniz's
calculus, the changing effect of least-action can be expressed
geometrically, by a type of animation called a differential equation. In
the case of a simply extended manifold, the changing effect of least
action is expressed as the changing curvature of a curve, and for a
doubly extended manifold, the changing curvature of a surface. Thus, in
both cases, the visible form of the action is expressed as a function of
the changing effect of the universal principle of least action.

It must be underscored that in both cases, the visible shape of the
curve or the surface is the effect of the characteristic {physical}
"modes of determination" of the manifold. These modes of determination
are not visible, but they are faithfully reflected in the visible
effects. The challenge for science is to be able to measure these
effects, and from their variations in the infinitesimally small,
determine the principles that integrate them into a unified extended
manifold of action.

As Riemann stated in his lecture notes *On Partial Differential
Equations and their Applications to Physical Problems* :

"What has been shown to be a fact by induction, that differential
equations form the actual foundation of mathematical physics, can also
be shown a priori. True elementary laws can operate only in the
infinitely small, and apply to points in space and time. But such laws
are in general partial differential equations, and the derivation of
laws for extended bodies and time periods requires their integration.
Thus we need methods for deriving from laws in the infinitely small such
laws in the finite, and, more precisely, derived with complete rigor,
without permitting oneself omissions. Because it is only then that we
can test them by way of experience."

Riemann was basing his work in this regard on the previous achievements
of Gauss, specifically, Gauss's treatises on curved surfaces, conformal
mapping and potential theory, some of which has been discussed in
previous installments of this series and some of which will be discussed
in future pedagogicals. For purposes of illustrating the concepts
essential for this discussion, we return to the case of the catenoid.

Like the catenary, the catenoid is able to maintain its stable shape,
because the tension exerted at every point is equalized by the changing
effect of the principle of least action. Or, inversely, the shape of the
catenary is the unique form which equalizes the tension exerted along
the chain, by the effort of the chain to support its weight under the
effect of gravity. But, unlike in the catenary where the tension is
exerted back and forth along a curve, in the catenoid, the tension is
exerted in an infinite number of directions radiating out from every
point.

This changing effect that produces equal tension can be expressed,
geometrically, by the changing curvature of the catenary curve, that
same effect can be expressed, for the catenoid, by the changing
curvature of the surface. But here the problem becomes more difficult,
because the curvature of the curves within the surface is always
different, depending on the curve's direction.

Gauss solved this problem by defining several ways to measure the
curvature of a surface. He recognized that at every point on any
surface, though there be an infinite number of curves radiating along
the surface from that point, one of them was the most curved and one of
them was the least, and that these curves were always perpendicular to
each other. [(See Figure
2.)](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure02.gif)

+:----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **Figure 2**                                                          |
|                                                                       |
| ![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/p                                 |
| lugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http:// |
| lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure02.gif"} |
| \<img                                                                 |
| src=\"http://                                                         |
| lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure02.gif\" |
| alt=\"\" />                                                           |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

Gauss measured the curvature of these curves, after Leibniz, by the size
of the osculating circles to the curves at that point. [(See Figure
3.)](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure03.gif)

+:----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **Figure 3**                                                          |
|                                                                       |
| ![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/p                                 |
| lugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http:// |
| lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure03.gif"} |
| \<img                                                                 |
| src=\"http://                                                         |
| lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure03.gif\" |
| alt=\"\" />                                                           |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

Since the larger the osculating circle, the smaller the curvature, and
vice versa, Gauss defined the measure of curvature at each point, as the
inverse of the product of the radii of the extreme osculating circles.
The characteristic curvature of a surface could thus be expressed by how
this measure of curvature changed over the extent of the surface.

**Riemann's Surfaces**

Whereas the catenoid is exemplary of a type of surface determined by a
physical principle, such surfaces, in most cases, do not necessarily
manifest a visible form. Nevertheless, a non- visible, but physical form
can be clearly defined, as Riemann indicates, by generalizing the idea
of a surface, to a concept of a multiply-extended manifold of physical
action. From this concept of a physical manifold, a visible, geometrical
form can be constructed, that faithfully reflects the characteristics of
the physical manifold. For example, the surface of the Earth, as Gauss
understood it, is the physical manifold that is everywhere perpendicular
to the pull of gravity. This doubly extended manifold is measured by the
changing effect that gravity has on the direction of a plumb bob. This
surface, while not directly visible, is nevertheless physically
determined, and thus, defines a physical geometric thought object, whose
characteristics reflect the principles of physical action of gravity.
Another example investigated by Gauss, is the physical manifold of the
Earth's magnetic effect, which, as a triply-extended manifold, is
measured by the changing directions of a compass needle at different
positions on the Earth. Here, too, the surface is not visible, but is,
nevertheless, a physically determined surface.

Gauss called these types of non-visible physical surfaces "potential"
surfaces, because they express the potential for action of a physical
principle. These manifolds do not express what is {visible}. Rather they
express what is {possible}, with respect to the physical constraints
imposed by a universal physical principle on the manifold of action,
just as the physical principle of least action imposes a certain
characteristic curvature on a hanging chain or soap film. Thus, when
investigating any physical process, it is necessary to form a concept of
the manifold of physical principles in which that process is occurring.
These principles impose a characteristic potential for action, which,
Leibniz, Gauss and Riemann showed, can be expressed, geometrically as a
characteristic curvature of the manifold. ( [Riemann's Dirichlet
Principle Riemann for Anti- Dummies Part
58](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part58.html) .)

Following Gauss, Riemann recognized that in the type of least action
physical manifold exemplified by the catenoid or Gauss's potential
surfaces, the curves of maximum and minimum curvature are harmonically
related, which means that their mutual curvatures change at the same
rate, in perpendicular directions. For example, in the catenoid, the
size of the osculating circles of maximum curvature and minimum
curvature increase or decrease at the same rate when moving from place
to place on the surface.

It should again be emphasized, that this harmonic relationship is an
effect, not a cause. The principle of least action is the cause, which,
in the visible domain is reflected in this harmonic relationship.

Gauss had recognized in his Copenhagen Prize Essay, that this harmonic
relationship, between the curves of maximum and minimum curvatures of a
surface, is a characteristic of functions in the complex domain. Gauss
applied this discovery by showing that the problem of mapping one
surface onto another, so that all angular relationships are preserved,
could be solved by finding a complex function that transformed one set
of harmonically related curves into another.

Riemann extended Gauss's idea by showing that from such complex
functions, an entire class of physical manifolds can be expressed, whose
"harmony would otherwise have remained hidden." For Riemann, complex
functions were a means to express a transformation from one physical
manifold into another, as an effect of changing the curvature of the
manifold's determining characteristics. Further, as we will soon see
from the implications of the essential features of Riemann's surfaces,
Riemann's generalization of Gauss enabled him to express a new type of
physical transformation, in which the potential for action is not simply
transformed, but is increased in power.

Or, in other words, Riemann's complex functions could express the power
to change, change.

To pedagogically illustrate Riemann's idea we will first introduce it,
clothed in the words and images of geometry. From there, its more
universal implications can more easily be brought to light.

This is a method similar to that used in investigating Archytas's
solution for doubling the cube or Gauss's solutions to the fundamental
theorem of algebra. In both cases the requirements of a specific
geometric solution reveal that the original paradox was ontological, not
mathematical, as it had first been presented. For example, the fact that
in order to double the cube, Archytas had to produce the multiply
connected manifold of physical action that generates, in a single act,
the torus, cylinder and cone, demonstrates that the principle that
generates the cube is outside the apparently spherical boundary of
visible space.

Similarly, as Gauss showed in his proof of the fundamental theorem of
algebra, the apparent mathematical paradox of the ?-1, was, in reality,
not a problem of algebra, but a problem of algebraists, who were fixated
on a false conception of the physical universe. As Gauss noted, the
paradox of the ?-1, is not a formal mathematical one, even though it may
have appeared in that form. Rather these paradoxes actually reflect "the
deepest questions of the metaphysics of space", as Gauss himself said.

Riemann exploited one such mathematical paradox to force to the surface
his new conception concerning manifolds of physical action.

That paradox arises , in its geometrical context, when investigating
complex functions represented, as Gauss did in his Copenhagen Prize
Essay, as conformal transformations of one surface onto another. In some
cases, these mappings are quite straightforward, such as the
stereographic projection of a sphere onto a plane, or the conformal
mapping of the spheroidal shape of the Earth onto a sphere. In these
cases, there is a one to one correspondence between every point of one
surface and every point of the other.

However, in some complex functions (most emphatically, all those
transcendental functions that correspond to physical action), this one
to one relationship does not occur. For example, the complex squaring
function, maps the points of one surface onto another twice. Or, in the
case of a complex cubic function, the points of one surface are mapped
onto another three times.

This can be illustrated with an animation [(See Figure
4a.)](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure04a.gif)
representing a complex cubing function.

+:----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **Figure 4a**                                                         |
|                                                                       |
| ![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/pl                                |
| ugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://l |
| ymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure04a.gif"} |
| \<img                                                                 |
| src=\"http://l                                                        |
| ymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure04a.gif\" |
| alt=\"\" />                                                           |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

Since the complex cubing function triples the angle of rotation, a 120
degree rotation of the surface of the circular disk on the left maps to
a full rotation of the surface of the circular disk on the right.
Likewise, the second 120 degree rotation of the surface of the circular
disk on the left also maps to a full rotation of the circular disk on
the right. So to with the third 120 degree rotation. Thus, each point of
the disk on the right, corresponds to three points on the disk on the
left. This inversion can be seen more clearly in [Figure
4b](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure04b.gif) which
maps the disk on the left as a function of the action of the disk on the
right.

+:----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **Figure 4b**                                                         |
|                                                                       |
| ![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/pl                                |
| ugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://l |
| ymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure04b.gif"} |
| \<img                                                                 |
| src=\"http://l                                                        |
| ymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure04b.gif\" |
| alt=\"\" />                                                           |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

Thus, there appears to be a mathematical ambiguity because one clearly
defined action produces three distinct effects, and there is no formal
algebraic way to distinguish one of these effects from the other.
However, as Gauss did in the fundamental theorem of algebra, Riemann,
applying Leibniz's method of *analysis situs* found a physical
geometrical form, which uniquely characterized the quality of physical
action, that underlies such multi-valued complex functions.

He rejected the method of Cauchy, who sought to define an algebraic
calculation to distinguish one effect from the other. Instead, Riemann
focused on the unique points of the mapping that were not multi-valued
the singularities. As Gauss did in his solution to the fundamental
theorem of algebra, Riemann created a construction whose geometric
characteristics expressed the organizing principle of the manifold by
the relationship between what the singularity and everything else in the
manifold.

To visualize Riemann's idea, we can use the above example of a cubic
function. For such a function, Riemann conceived of each of the three
different effects produced by the cubic rotation, to be different
branches of one action. He represented each as a different layer on a
surface of three sheets. These layers were connected to each other at
the point of singularity, where their values all coincided. He called
this point a branch point. [(See Figure
5.)](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure05.gif)

+:----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **Figure 5**                                                          |
|                                                                       |
| ![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/p                                 |
| lugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http:// |
| lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure05.gif"} |
| \<img                                                                 |
| src=\"http://                                                         |
| lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure05.gif\" |
| alt=\"\" />                                                           |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

Thus, in our example, the effect of the first 120 degree rotations are
spread over the first layer, the effect of the second 120 degree
rotation is spread over the second layer, and the effect of the third
120 degree rotation is spread over the third layer. But since the action
is continuous so must be the effects. To express this, Riemann connected
these layers to each other by making a cut emanating outward from the
branch point, which he called a branch cut. Along this cut, he connected
the first layer to the second, the second to the third and the third
back to the first. [(See Figure
6.)](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure06.gif)

+:----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **Figure 6**                                                          |
|                                                                       |
| ![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/p                                 |
| lugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http:// |
| lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure06.gif"} |
| \<img                                                                 |
| src=\"http://                                                         |
| lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure06.gif\" |
| alt=\"\" />                                                           |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

In this way, Riemann expresses a physical relationship in which a single
continuous action that produces a multiplicity of effects are integrated
into one continuous manifold.

It is important to underscore, that though we can create a vivid image
in our mind of Riemann's surface, it is impossible to physically
construct it in visible space. Nevertheless, Riemann's imagined surface,
because it reflects an ontological principle of action, produces a very
real effect. From it we can gain a greater insight into the relationship
between a manifold of universal physical principles and their physical
effects.

The ontological implications of Riemann's surfaces begin to shine
through if we investigate a slightly more complicated example. The next
set of animations illustrate Riemann's surface for a fourth power
algebraic function, which produces a Riemann's surface with four layers.
The sets of perpendicular lines on the left and quartic curves on the
right represent the effect of the transformation on the manifold's
harmonically related curves of maximum and minimum curvature.

In the first animation, these four roots are represented by four colored
dots, that are shifted, in Riemann's surface to lie on top of each other
at the branch point. [(See Figure
7.)](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure07.gif)

+:----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **Figure 7**                                                          |
|                                                                       |
| ![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/p                                 |
| lugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http:// |
| lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure07.gif"} |
| \<img                                                                 |
| src=\"http://                                                         |
| lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure07.gif\" |
| alt=\"\" />                                                           |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

Now, think of this Riemann's surface as a type of manifold of physical
action, and investigate the effect of this transformation on different
actions. In [Figure
8a](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure01.gif) we see
the effect within this manifold on a circular rotation around one of the
roots.

+:----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **Figure 8a**                                                         |
|                                                                       |
| ![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/pl                                |
| ugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://l |
| ymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure08a.gif"} |
| \<img                                                                 |
| src=\"http://l                                                        |
| ymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure08a.gif\" |
| alt=\"\" />                                                           |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

The original action is depicted in the left panel and its effect is
depicted on the right. In [Figure
8b](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure08b.gif) , we
see the same action depicted from a side view of Riemann's surface,
showing that the pathway loops around the one layer containing the root
and then continuing, without looping through the rest of the layers.

+:----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **Figure 8b**                                                         |
|                                                                       |
| ![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/pl                                |
| ugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://l |
| ymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure08b.gif"} |
| \<img                                                                 |
| src=\"http://l                                                        |
| ymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure08b.gif\" |
| alt=\"\" />                                                           |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

In Figure
[8b](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure08b.gif) we
see top down view of
[9b](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure09b.gif) .
Compare this with the result in
[8a](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure08a.gif) .

In Figures
[9a](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure09a.gif) ,
[9b](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure09b.gif) , and
[9c](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure09c.gif) we
see a similar representation of the same type of action but around a
different singularity, and with a similar effect.

+:----------------------------------+:----------------------------------+
| **Figure 9a**                     | **Figure 9b**                     |
|                                   |                                   |
| ![](http://                       | ![](http://                       |
| lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/ | lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/ |
| speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1 | speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1 |
| .trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymc | .trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymc |
| anada.org/wp-content/uploads/site | anada.org/wp-content/uploads/site |
| s/2/2010/02/part60figure09a.gif"} | s/2/2010/02/part60figure09b.gif"} |
| \<img                             | \<img                             |
| src=\"http://lymc                 | src=\"http://lymc                 |
| anada.org/wp-content/uploads/site | anada.org/wp-content/uploads/site |
| s/2/2010/02/part60figure09a.gif\" | s/2/2010/02/part60figure09b.gif\" |
| alt=\"\" />                       | alt=\"\" />                       |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

+:----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **Figure 9c**                                                         |
|                                                                       |
| ![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/pl                                |
| ugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://l |
| ymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure09c.gif"} |
| \<img                                                                 |
| src=\"http://l                                                        |
| ymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure09c.gif\" |
| alt=\"\" />                                                           |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

In Figures
[10a](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure10a.gif) ,
[10b](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure10b.gif) ,
[10c](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure10c.gif) we
see the effect on a closed pathway that encompasses no singularities.

+:----------------------------------+:----------------------------------+
| **Figure 10a**                    | **Figure 10b**                    |
|                                   |                                   |
| ![](http://                       | ![](http://                       |
| lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/ | lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/ |
| speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1 | speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1 |
| .trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymc | .trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymc |
| anada.org/wp-content/uploads/site | anada.org/wp-content/uploads/site |
| s/2/2010/02/part60figure10a.gif"} | s/2/2010/02/part60figure10b.gif"} |
| \<img                             | \<img                             |
| src=\"http://lymc                 | src=\"http://lymc                 |
| anada.org/wp-content/uploads/site | anada.org/wp-content/uploads/site |
| s/2/2010/02/part60figure10a.gif\" | s/2/2010/02/part60figure10b.gif\" |
| alt=\"\" />                       | alt=\"\" />                       |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

+:----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **Figure 10c**                                                        |
|                                                                       |
| ![]()                                                                 |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

But, in Figures
[11a](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure11a.gif)
[11b](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure11b.gif) ,
and [11c](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure11c.gif)
we see a simple closed pathway that circles two singularities.

+:----------------------------------+:----------------------------------+
| **Figure 11a**                    | **Figure 11b**                    |
|                                   |                                   |
| ![](http://                       | ![](http://                       |
| lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/ | lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/ |
| speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1 | speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1 |
| .trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymc | .trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymc |
| anada.org/wp-content/uploads/site | anada.org/wp-content/uploads/site |
| s/2/2010/02/part60figure11a.gif"} | s/2/2010/02/part60figure11b.gif"} |
| \<img                             | \<img                             |
| src=\"http://lymc                 | src=\"http://lymc                 |
| anada.org/wp-content/uploads/site | anada.org/wp-content/uploads/site |
| s/2/2010/02/part60figure11a.gif\" | s/2/2010/02/part60figure11b.gif\" |
| alt=\"\" />                       | alt=\"\" />                       |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

+:----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **Figure 11c**                                                        |
|                                                                       |
| ![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/pl                                |
| ugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://l |
| ymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure11c.gif"} |
| \<img                                                                 |
| src=\"http://l                                                        |
| ymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure11c.gif\" |
| alt=\"\" />                                                           |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

Here the effect of the transformation is to produce a double loop around
the branch point. Thus, within this type of manifold, an action that
encompasses a greater number of singularities produces a greater effect.
In other words, Riemann's surface expresses a type of multiply extended
continuous manifold in which the power of any action is a function of
the number of singularities encompassed by that action.

In Figures
[12a](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure12a.gif) ,
[12b](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure12b.gif) ,
[12c](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure12c.gif) we
see this power is increased once again when the pathway of action
encompasses three singularities.

+:----------------------------------+:----------------------------------+
| **Figure 12a**                    | **Figure 12b**                    |
|                                   |                                   |
| ![](http://                       | ![](http://                       |
| lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/ | lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/ |
| speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1 | speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1 |
| .trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymc | .trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymc |
| anada.org/wp-content/uploads/site | anada.org/wp-content/uploads/site |
| s/2/2010/02/part60figure12a.gif"} | s/2/2010/02/part60figure12b.gif"} |
| \<img                             | \<img                             |
| src=\"http://lymc                 | src=\"http://lymc                 |
| anada.org/wp-content/uploads/site | anada.org/wp-content/uploads/site |
| s/2/2010/02/part60figure12a.gif\" | s/2/2010/02/part60figure12b.gif\" |
| alt=\"\" />                       | alt=\"\" />                       |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

+:----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **Figure 12c**                                                        |
|                                                                       |
| ![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/pl                                |
| ugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://l |
| ymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure12c.gif"} |
| \<img                                                                 |
| src=\"http://l                                                        |
| ymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure12c.gif\" |
| alt=\"\" />                                                           |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

And, in Figures
[13a](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure13a.gif) ,
[13b](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure13b.gif) ,
[13c](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure13c.gif) , a
further increase in power is represented by a loop around 4
singularities which is transformed into a quadruple loop around the
branch point.

+:----------------------------------+:----------------------------------+
| **Figure 13a**                    | **Figure 13b**                    |
|                                   |                                   |
| ![](http://                       | ![](http://                       |
| lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/ | lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/ |
| speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1 | speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1 |
| .trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymc | .trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymc |
| anada.org/wp-content/uploads/site | anada.org/wp-content/uploads/site |
| s/2/2010/02/part60figure13a.gif"} | s/2/2010/02/part60figure13b.gif"} |
| \<img                             | \<img                             |
| src=\"http://lymc                 | src=\"http://lymc                 |
| anada.org/wp-content/uploads/site | anada.org/wp-content/uploads/site |
| s/2/2010/02/part60figure13a.gif\" | s/2/2010/02/part60figure13b.gif\" |
| alt=\"\" />                       | alt=\"\" />                       |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

+:----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **Figure 13c**                                                        |
|                                                                       |
| ![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/pl                                |
| ugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://l |
| ymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure13c.gif"} |
| \<img                                                                 |
| src=\"http://l                                                        |
| ymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure13c.gif\" |
| alt=\"\" />                                                           |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

Here we have reached the limit of the power of this particular type of
complex function. To increase the function's power, a new principle must
be introduced, which will add a new singularity to the manifold of
physical action. With the incorporation of this new singularity, into
the manifold, a greater potential for action is achieved.

This defines a still higher type of transformation, one that adds new
singularities to the manifold of action. But in these algebraic
examples, these singularities are added one by one. Riemann showed, than
Abel's extended class of higher transcendental functions, when expressed
on Riemann's surface, express a type of transformation that increases
the rate and the density at which singularities can be added.

This part of the investigation will have to be continued until next
time. But, at least we have begun to scratch the surface.
:::

::: {.addtoany_share_save_container .addtoany_content_bottom}
::: {.a2a_kit .a2a_kit_size_32 .addtoany_list a2a-url="http://lymcanada.org/60/" a2a-title="Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 60 :  The Power To Change, Change"}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F60%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2060%20%3A%20%20The%20Power%20To%20Change%2C%20Change "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F60%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2060%20%3A%20%20The%20Power%20To%20Change%2C%20Change "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/google_plus?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F60%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2060%20%3A%20%20The%20Power%20To%20Change%2C%20Change "Google+"){.a2a_button_google_plus}
[](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd .addtoany_share_save}
:::
:::
:::

[ [ Posted on ]{.screen-reader-text} [February 20, 2010 February 24,
2019](http://lymcanada.org/60/) ]{.posted-on} [ [ [ Author
]{.screen-reader-text} [Bruce
Director](http://lymcanada.org/author/bdirector/){.url .fn .n} ]{.author
.vcard} ]{.byline} [ [ Categories ]{.screen-reader-text}
[EN](http://lymcanada.org/category/en/) , [Riemmann for
Anti-Dummies](http://lymcanada.org/category/science-1/c132-riemmann-for-anti-dummies/)
]{.cat-links}

::: post-thumbnail
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.attachment-post-thumbnail
.size-post-thumbnail .wp-post-image width="300" height="396"
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part60_files_part60figure01.gif"}

\<img width=\"300\" height=\"396\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part60_files_part60figure01.gif\"
class=\"attachment-post-thumbnail size-post-thumbnail wp-post-image\"
alt=\"\" />
:::

::: entry-header
# Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 60 : The Power To Change, Change {#riemann-for-anti-dummies-part-60-the-power-to-change-change-1 .entry-title}
:::

::: entry-content
::: pf-content
## The Power to Change, Change {#the-power-to-change-change-1 style="text-align: left;"}

New ideas, like people, come into this world naked. To effectively
perform their mission, they must be provided with clothes. But unlike
children who can speak for themselves, ideas must be dressed in words
and images which, upon careful reflection, indicate how they were
conceived. And though it would be a grave error to mistake a person's
substance for his or her outward appearance, the spirit of an idea
(which also cannot be captured by a superficial account of its form)
can, nevertheless, be evoked by that form's animation. Yet there are
those for whom the generation of such thoughts had seemed impossible,
and to whom the very existence of such creations signifies a power they
had denied could be. They focus only on the form, gossiping about its
appearance, chiding its unconventionality or smothering it with an
effusive description of its external features.

The history of science is replete with examples of such new creatures,
which have been defended from such sophistries by their authors' careful
constructions: Archytas's solution for the doubling of the cube, or
Gauss's complex surfaces, to name but two of those reviewed in previous
installments of this series. Though such constructions arise as the
unexpected solutions to specific problems, they embody the powerful new
thoughts which made such solutions possible. Thus, their recreation
evokes that more general principle, which, though forever connected to
its origins, emerges as a new universal idea, and gains for all time, a
universal increase in the cognitive power of man.

Now we turn our attention to another such creation, previously
mentioned, but not yet adequately developed in this forum: the
hypothesis which lies at the foundations of Riemann's surface.

Riemann first presented to the world his new idea in his doctoral
dissertation of 1851, and elaborated its implications in his 1854
habilitation lecture, his 1857 treatises on Abelian and hypergeometric
functions, and his posthumously published philosophical fragments. From
all these sources, and the historical context in which they were
produced, we can reconstruct Riemann's new idea as the solution to the
unresolved physical paradoxes brought to the fore by C.F. Gauss's
extension of Leibniz's calculus into the complex domain.

But from this exercise we acquire much more. As we form Riemann's
surfaces in our mind as images, we begin to recognize the quality of
mind which produced this solution, and a more universal thought takes
shape as well. From this point forward these images evoke in our minds
that universal thought. Thus, we can bring Riemann's creation to life,
not simply as a solution to a formal mathematical problem, as its
outward appearance is most frequently portrayed, but as an expression of
an epistemological concept that has revolutionized human thinking.

**What is a Surface?**

When Riemann and Gauss speak of surfaces, they do not mean visible
objects embedded in a linearly-extended Euclidean-type space. Rather,
they speak of what Riemann identified in his 1854 habilitation paper as
"multiply-extended continuous manifolds." Such manifolds are not defined
by a set of a priori axiomatic assumptions, but are concepts arising
from an investigation of physical action determined by universal
physical principles.

"In a concept whose various modes of determination form a continuous
manifold, if one passes in a definite way from one mode of determination
to another, the modes of determination which are traversed constitute a
simply extended manifold and its essential mark is this, that in it, a
continuous progress is possible from any point only in two directions,
forward and backward. If now one forms the thought of this manifold
again passing over into another entirely different, here again in a
definite way, that is, in such a way that every point goes over into a
definite point of the other, then will all the modes of determination
thus obtained form a doubly extended manifold. In similar procedure one
obtains a triply extended manifold when one represents to oneself that a
double extension passes over in a definite way into one entirely
different, and it is easy to see how one can prolong this construction
indefinitely. If one considers his object of thought as variable instead
of regarding the concept as determinable, then this construction can be
characterized as a synthesis of a variability of "n + 1" dimensions out
of a variability of "n" dimensions and a variability of one dimension."
(Riemann's Habilitation Lecture)

Before continuing with this more general investigation of multiply
extended manifolds, let us take as an example, the specific cases of the
catenary and the catenoid.

As was illustrated in the last installment of this series, Leibniz,
through his infinitesimal differential calculus, created a means to
express physical action as the intended effect of a universal physical
principle that is acting, universally, but differently, at every
infinitesimal interval of time and space. In the case of the catenary,
this is expressed by the fact that the visible shape of the catenary is
determined by the changing effect of the physical principle of
least-action on a chain supporting its own weight. Though this effect is
different at each point along the catenary curve, these differences are
determined by that general principle which integrates them so as to
produce a physically stable chain.

Now, compare this case with that of the surface of a catenoid, formed,
for example, by a soap film suspended between two circular hoops. [(See
Figure 1.)](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure01.gif)

+:----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **Figure 1**                                                          |
|                                                                       |
| ![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/p                                 |
| lugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http:// |
| lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure01.gif"} |
| \<img                                                                 |
| src=\"http://                                                         |
| lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure01.gif\" |
| alt=\"\" />                                                           |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

Here the soap film is suspended between the hoops along catenary curves,
but this family of catenaries are themselves integrated, along circular
pathways, into a surface. Thus, like the catenary, the visible shape of
the catenoid is determined by the changing effect of the physical
principle of least action, but instead of those changes varying only
along one curve, as in the case of the catenary, those differences occur
within a rotational manifold of catenary curves. Therefore, the general
principle that determines the stable shape of the soap film is expressed
as the integrated effect that unites these two distinct but connected
types of differences under one, higher principle.

From the standpoint of Riemann's habilitation lecture cited above, the
catenary comes under his concept of a simply extended manifold, whereas,
the catenoid is a type of doubly extended manifold. Using Leibniz's
calculus, the changing effect of least-action can be expressed
geometrically, by a type of animation called a differential equation. In
the case of a simply extended manifold, the changing effect of least
action is expressed as the changing curvature of a curve, and for a
doubly extended manifold, the changing curvature of a surface. Thus, in
both cases, the visible form of the action is expressed as a function of
the changing effect of the universal principle of least action.

It must be underscored that in both cases, the visible shape of the
curve or the surface is the effect of the characteristic {physical}
"modes of determination" of the manifold. These modes of determination
are not visible, but they are faithfully reflected in the visible
effects. The challenge for science is to be able to measure these
effects, and from their variations in the infinitesimally small,
determine the principles that integrate them into a unified extended
manifold of action.

As Riemann stated in his lecture notes *On Partial Differential
Equations and their Applications to Physical Problems* :

"What has been shown to be a fact by induction, that differential
equations form the actual foundation of mathematical physics, can also
be shown a priori. True elementary laws can operate only in the
infinitely small, and apply to points in space and time. But such laws
are in general partial differential equations, and the derivation of
laws for extended bodies and time periods requires their integration.
Thus we need methods for deriving from laws in the infinitely small such
laws in the finite, and, more precisely, derived with complete rigor,
without permitting oneself omissions. Because it is only then that we
can test them by way of experience."

Riemann was basing his work in this regard on the previous achievements
of Gauss, specifically, Gauss's treatises on curved surfaces, conformal
mapping and potential theory, some of which has been discussed in
previous installments of this series and some of which will be discussed
in future pedagogicals. For purposes of illustrating the concepts
essential for this discussion, we return to the case of the catenoid.

Like the catenary, the catenoid is able to maintain its stable shape,
because the tension exerted at every point is equalized by the changing
effect of the principle of least action. Or, inversely, the shape of the
catenary is the unique form which equalizes the tension exerted along
the chain, by the effort of the chain to support its weight under the
effect of gravity. But, unlike in the catenary where the tension is
exerted back and forth along a curve, in the catenoid, the tension is
exerted in an infinite number of directions radiating out from every
point.

This changing effect that produces equal tension can be expressed,
geometrically, by the changing curvature of the catenary curve, that
same effect can be expressed, for the catenoid, by the changing
curvature of the surface. But here the problem becomes more difficult,
because the curvature of the curves within the surface is always
different, depending on the curve's direction.

Gauss solved this problem by defining several ways to measure the
curvature of a surface. He recognized that at every point on any
surface, though there be an infinite number of curves radiating along
the surface from that point, one of them was the most curved and one of
them was the least, and that these curves were always perpendicular to
each other. [(See Figure
2.)](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure02.gif)

+:----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **Figure 2**                                                          |
|                                                                       |
| ![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/p                                 |
| lugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http:// |
| lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure02.gif"} |
| \<img                                                                 |
| src=\"http://                                                         |
| lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure02.gif\" |
| alt=\"\" />                                                           |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

Gauss measured the curvature of these curves, after Leibniz, by the size
of the osculating circles to the curves at that point. [(See Figure
3.)](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure03.gif)

+:----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **Figure 3**                                                          |
|                                                                       |
| ![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/p                                 |
| lugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http:// |
| lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure03.gif"} |
| \<img                                                                 |
| src=\"http://                                                         |
| lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure03.gif\" |
| alt=\"\" />                                                           |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

Since the larger the osculating circle, the smaller the curvature, and
vice versa, Gauss defined the measure of curvature at each point, as the
inverse of the product of the radii of the extreme osculating circles.
The characteristic curvature of a surface could thus be expressed by how
this measure of curvature changed over the extent of the surface.

**Riemann's Surfaces**

Whereas the catenoid is exemplary of a type of surface determined by a
physical principle, such surfaces, in most cases, do not necessarily
manifest a visible form. Nevertheless, a non- visible, but physical form
can be clearly defined, as Riemann indicates, by generalizing the idea
of a surface, to a concept of a multiply-extended manifold of physical
action. From this concept of a physical manifold, a visible, geometrical
form can be constructed, that faithfully reflects the characteristics of
the physical manifold. For example, the surface of the Earth, as Gauss
understood it, is the physical manifold that is everywhere perpendicular
to the pull of gravity. This doubly extended manifold is measured by the
changing effect that gravity has on the direction of a plumb bob. This
surface, while not directly visible, is nevertheless physically
determined, and thus, defines a physical geometric thought object, whose
characteristics reflect the principles of physical action of gravity.
Another example investigated by Gauss, is the physical manifold of the
Earth's magnetic effect, which, as a triply-extended manifold, is
measured by the changing directions of a compass needle at different
positions on the Earth. Here, too, the surface is not visible, but is,
nevertheless, a physically determined surface.

Gauss called these types of non-visible physical surfaces "potential"
surfaces, because they express the potential for action of a physical
principle. These manifolds do not express what is {visible}. Rather they
express what is {possible}, with respect to the physical constraints
imposed by a universal physical principle on the manifold of action,
just as the physical principle of least action imposes a certain
characteristic curvature on a hanging chain or soap film. Thus, when
investigating any physical process, it is necessary to form a concept of
the manifold of physical principles in which that process is occurring.
These principles impose a characteristic potential for action, which,
Leibniz, Gauss and Riemann showed, can be expressed, geometrically as a
characteristic curvature of the manifold. ( [Riemann's Dirichlet
Principle Riemann for Anti- Dummies Part
58](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part58.html) .)

Following Gauss, Riemann recognized that in the type of least action
physical manifold exemplified by the catenoid or Gauss's potential
surfaces, the curves of maximum and minimum curvature are harmonically
related, which means that their mutual curvatures change at the same
rate, in perpendicular directions. For example, in the catenoid, the
size of the osculating circles of maximum curvature and minimum
curvature increase or decrease at the same rate when moving from place
to place on the surface.

It should again be emphasized, that this harmonic relationship is an
effect, not a cause. The principle of least action is the cause, which,
in the visible domain is reflected in this harmonic relationship.

Gauss had recognized in his Copenhagen Prize Essay, that this harmonic
relationship, between the curves of maximum and minimum curvatures of a
surface, is a characteristic of functions in the complex domain. Gauss
applied this discovery by showing that the problem of mapping one
surface onto another, so that all angular relationships are preserved,
could be solved by finding a complex function that transformed one set
of harmonically related curves into another.

Riemann extended Gauss's idea by showing that from such complex
functions, an entire class of physical manifolds can be expressed, whose
"harmony would otherwise have remained hidden." For Riemann, complex
functions were a means to express a transformation from one physical
manifold into another, as an effect of changing the curvature of the
manifold's determining characteristics. Further, as we will soon see
from the implications of the essential features of Riemann's surfaces,
Riemann's generalization of Gauss enabled him to express a new type of
physical transformation, in which the potential for action is not simply
transformed, but is increased in power.

Or, in other words, Riemann's complex functions could express the power
to change, change.

To pedagogically illustrate Riemann's idea we will first introduce it,
clothed in the words and images of geometry. From there, its more
universal implications can more easily be brought to light.

This is a method similar to that used in investigating Archytas's
solution for doubling the cube or Gauss's solutions to the fundamental
theorem of algebra. In both cases the requirements of a specific
geometric solution reveal that the original paradox was ontological, not
mathematical, as it had first been presented. For example, the fact that
in order to double the cube, Archytas had to produce the multiply
connected manifold of physical action that generates, in a single act,
the torus, cylinder and cone, demonstrates that the principle that
generates the cube is outside the apparently spherical boundary of
visible space.

Similarly, as Gauss showed in his proof of the fundamental theorem of
algebra, the apparent mathematical paradox of the ?-1, was, in reality,
not a problem of algebra, but a problem of algebraists, who were fixated
on a false conception of the physical universe. As Gauss noted, the
paradox of the ?-1, is not a formal mathematical one, even though it may
have appeared in that form. Rather these paradoxes actually reflect "the
deepest questions of the metaphysics of space", as Gauss himself said.

Riemann exploited one such mathematical paradox to force to the surface
his new conception concerning manifolds of physical action.

That paradox arises , in its geometrical context, when investigating
complex functions represented, as Gauss did in his Copenhagen Prize
Essay, as conformal transformations of one surface onto another. In some
cases, these mappings are quite straightforward, such as the
stereographic projection of a sphere onto a plane, or the conformal
mapping of the spheroidal shape of the Earth onto a sphere. In these
cases, there is a one to one correspondence between every point of one
surface and every point of the other.

However, in some complex functions (most emphatically, all those
transcendental functions that correspond to physical action), this one
to one relationship does not occur. For example, the complex squaring
function, maps the points of one surface onto another twice. Or, in the
case of a complex cubic function, the points of one surface are mapped
onto another three times.

This can be illustrated with an animation [(See Figure
4a.)](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure04a.gif)
representing a complex cubing function.

+:----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **Figure 4a**                                                         |
|                                                                       |
| ![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/pl                                |
| ugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://l |
| ymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure04a.gif"} |
| \<img                                                                 |
| src=\"http://l                                                        |
| ymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure04a.gif\" |
| alt=\"\" />                                                           |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

Since the complex cubing function triples the angle of rotation, a 120
degree rotation of the surface of the circular disk on the left maps to
a full rotation of the surface of the circular disk on the right.
Likewise, the second 120 degree rotation of the surface of the circular
disk on the left also maps to a full rotation of the circular disk on
the right. So to with the third 120 degree rotation. Thus, each point of
the disk on the right, corresponds to three points on the disk on the
left. This inversion can be seen more clearly in [Figure
4b](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure04b.gif) which
maps the disk on the left as a function of the action of the disk on the
right.

+:----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **Figure 4b**                                                         |
|                                                                       |
| ![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/pl                                |
| ugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://l |
| ymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure04b.gif"} |
| \<img                                                                 |
| src=\"http://l                                                        |
| ymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure04b.gif\" |
| alt=\"\" />                                                           |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

Thus, there appears to be a mathematical ambiguity because one clearly
defined action produces three distinct effects, and there is no formal
algebraic way to distinguish one of these effects from the other.
However, as Gauss did in the fundamental theorem of algebra, Riemann,
applying Leibniz's method of *analysis situs* found a physical
geometrical form, which uniquely characterized the quality of physical
action, that underlies such multi-valued complex functions.

He rejected the method of Cauchy, who sought to define an algebraic
calculation to distinguish one effect from the other. Instead, Riemann
focused on the unique points of the mapping that were not multi-valued
the singularities. As Gauss did in his solution to the fundamental
theorem of algebra, Riemann created a construction whose geometric
characteristics expressed the organizing principle of the manifold by
the relationship between what the singularity and everything else in the
manifold.

To visualize Riemann's idea, we can use the above example of a cubic
function. For such a function, Riemann conceived of each of the three
different effects produced by the cubic rotation, to be different
branches of one action. He represented each as a different layer on a
surface of three sheets. These layers were connected to each other at
the point of singularity, where their values all coincided. He called
this point a branch point. [(See Figure
5.)](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure05.gif)

+:----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **Figure 5**                                                          |
|                                                                       |
| ![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/p                                 |
| lugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http:// |
| lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure05.gif"} |
| \<img                                                                 |
| src=\"http://                                                         |
| lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure05.gif\" |
| alt=\"\" />                                                           |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

Thus, in our example, the effect of the first 120 degree rotations are
spread over the first layer, the effect of the second 120 degree
rotation is spread over the second layer, and the effect of the third
120 degree rotation is spread over the third layer. But since the action
is continuous so must be the effects. To express this, Riemann connected
these layers to each other by making a cut emanating outward from the
branch point, which he called a branch cut. Along this cut, he connected
the first layer to the second, the second to the third and the third
back to the first. [(See Figure
6.)](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure06.gif)

+:----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **Figure 6**                                                          |
|                                                                       |
| ![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/p                                 |
| lugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http:// |
| lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure06.gif"} |
| \<img                                                                 |
| src=\"http://                                                         |
| lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure06.gif\" |
| alt=\"\" />                                                           |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

In this way, Riemann expresses a physical relationship in which a single
continuous action that produces a multiplicity of effects are integrated
into one continuous manifold.

It is important to underscore, that though we can create a vivid image
in our mind of Riemann's surface, it is impossible to physically
construct it in visible space. Nevertheless, Riemann's imagined surface,
because it reflects an ontological principle of action, produces a very
real effect. From it we can gain a greater insight into the relationship
between a manifold of universal physical principles and their physical
effects.

The ontological implications of Riemann's surfaces begin to shine
through if we investigate a slightly more complicated example. The next
set of animations illustrate Riemann's surface for a fourth power
algebraic function, which produces a Riemann's surface with four layers.
The sets of perpendicular lines on the left and quartic curves on the
right represent the effect of the transformation on the manifold's
harmonically related curves of maximum and minimum curvature.

In the first animation, these four roots are represented by four colored
dots, that are shifted, in Riemann's surface to lie on top of each other
at the branch point. [(See Figure
7.)](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure07.gif)

+:----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **Figure 7**                                                          |
|                                                                       |
| ![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/p                                 |
| lugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http:// |
| lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure07.gif"} |
| \<img                                                                 |
| src=\"http://                                                         |
| lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure07.gif\" |
| alt=\"\" />                                                           |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

Now, think of this Riemann's surface as a type of manifold of physical
action, and investigate the effect of this transformation on different
actions. In [Figure
8a](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure01.gif) we see
the effect within this manifold on a circular rotation around one of the
roots.

+:----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **Figure 8a**                                                         |
|                                                                       |
| ![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/pl                                |
| ugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://l |
| ymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure08a.gif"} |
| \<img                                                                 |
| src=\"http://l                                                        |
| ymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure08a.gif\" |
| alt=\"\" />                                                           |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

The original action is depicted in the left panel and its effect is
depicted on the right. In [Figure
8b](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure08b.gif) , we
see the same action depicted from a side view of Riemann's surface,
showing that the pathway loops around the one layer containing the root
and then continuing, without looping through the rest of the layers.

+:----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **Figure 8b**                                                         |
|                                                                       |
| ![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/pl                                |
| ugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://l |
| ymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure08b.gif"} |
| \<img                                                                 |
| src=\"http://l                                                        |
| ymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure08b.gif\" |
| alt=\"\" />                                                           |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

In Figure
[8b](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure08b.gif) we
see top down view of
[9b](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure09b.gif) .
Compare this with the result in
[8a](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure08a.gif) .

In Figures
[9a](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure09a.gif) ,
[9b](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure09b.gif) , and
[9c](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure09c.gif) we
see a similar representation of the same type of action but around a
different singularity, and with a similar effect.

+:----------------------------------+:----------------------------------+
| **Figure 9a**                     | **Figure 9b**                     |
|                                   |                                   |
| ![](http://                       | ![](http://                       |
| lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/ | lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/ |
| speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1 | speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1 |
| .trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymc | .trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymc |
| anada.org/wp-content/uploads/site | anada.org/wp-content/uploads/site |
| s/2/2010/02/part60figure09a.gif"} | s/2/2010/02/part60figure09b.gif"} |
| \<img                             | \<img                             |
| src=\"http://lymc                 | src=\"http://lymc                 |
| anada.org/wp-content/uploads/site | anada.org/wp-content/uploads/site |
| s/2/2010/02/part60figure09a.gif\" | s/2/2010/02/part60figure09b.gif\" |
| alt=\"\" />                       | alt=\"\" />                       |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

+:----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **Figure 9c**                                                         |
|                                                                       |
| ![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/pl                                |
| ugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://l |
| ymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure09c.gif"} |
| \<img                                                                 |
| src=\"http://l                                                        |
| ymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure09c.gif\" |
| alt=\"\" />                                                           |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

In Figures
[10a](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure10a.gif) ,
[10b](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure10b.gif) ,
[10c](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure10c.gif) we
see the effect on a closed pathway that encompasses no singularities.

+:----------------------------------+:----------------------------------+
| **Figure 10a**                    | **Figure 10b**                    |
|                                   |                                   |
| ![](http://                       | ![](http://                       |
| lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/ | lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/ |
| speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1 | speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1 |
| .trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymc | .trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymc |
| anada.org/wp-content/uploads/site | anada.org/wp-content/uploads/site |
| s/2/2010/02/part60figure10a.gif"} | s/2/2010/02/part60figure10b.gif"} |
| \<img                             | \<img                             |
| src=\"http://lymc                 | src=\"http://lymc                 |
| anada.org/wp-content/uploads/site | anada.org/wp-content/uploads/site |
| s/2/2010/02/part60figure10a.gif\" | s/2/2010/02/part60figure10b.gif\" |
| alt=\"\" />                       | alt=\"\" />                       |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

+:----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **Figure 10c**                                                        |
|                                                                       |
| ![]()                                                                 |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

But, in Figures
[11a](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure11a.gif)
[11b](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure11b.gif) ,
and [11c](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure11c.gif)
we see a simple closed pathway that circles two singularities.

+:----------------------------------+:----------------------------------+
| **Figure 11a**                    | **Figure 11b**                    |
|                                   |                                   |
| ![](http://                       | ![](http://                       |
| lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/ | lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/ |
| speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1 | speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1 |
| .trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymc | .trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymc |
| anada.org/wp-content/uploads/site | anada.org/wp-content/uploads/site |
| s/2/2010/02/part60figure11a.gif"} | s/2/2010/02/part60figure11b.gif"} |
| \<img                             | \<img                             |
| src=\"http://lymc                 | src=\"http://lymc                 |
| anada.org/wp-content/uploads/site | anada.org/wp-content/uploads/site |
| s/2/2010/02/part60figure11a.gif\" | s/2/2010/02/part60figure11b.gif\" |
| alt=\"\" />                       | alt=\"\" />                       |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

+:----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **Figure 11c**                                                        |
|                                                                       |
| ![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/pl                                |
| ugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://l |
| ymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure11c.gif"} |
| \<img                                                                 |
| src=\"http://l                                                        |
| ymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure11c.gif\" |
| alt=\"\" />                                                           |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

Here the effect of the transformation is to produce a double loop around
the branch point. Thus, within this type of manifold, an action that
encompasses a greater number of singularities produces a greater effect.
In other words, Riemann's surface expresses a type of multiply extended
continuous manifold in which the power of any action is a function of
the number of singularities encompassed by that action.

In Figures
[12a](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure12a.gif) ,
[12b](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure12b.gif) ,
[12c](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure12c.gif) we
see this power is increased once again when the pathway of action
encompasses three singularities.

+:----------------------------------+:----------------------------------+
| **Figure 12a**                    | **Figure 12b**                    |
|                                   |                                   |
| ![](http://                       | ![](http://                       |
| lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/ | lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/ |
| speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1 | speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1 |
| .trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymc | .trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymc |
| anada.org/wp-content/uploads/site | anada.org/wp-content/uploads/site |
| s/2/2010/02/part60figure12a.gif"} | s/2/2010/02/part60figure12b.gif"} |
| \<img                             | \<img                             |
| src=\"http://lymc                 | src=\"http://lymc                 |
| anada.org/wp-content/uploads/site | anada.org/wp-content/uploads/site |
| s/2/2010/02/part60figure12a.gif\" | s/2/2010/02/part60figure12b.gif\" |
| alt=\"\" />                       | alt=\"\" />                       |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

+:----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **Figure 12c**                                                        |
|                                                                       |
| ![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/pl                                |
| ugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://l |
| ymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure12c.gif"} |
| \<img                                                                 |
| src=\"http://l                                                        |
| ymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure12c.gif\" |
| alt=\"\" />                                                           |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

And, in Figures
[13a](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure13a.gif) ,
[13b](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure13b.gif) ,
[13c](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part60_files/part60figure13c.gif) , a
further increase in power is represented by a loop around 4
singularities which is transformed into a quadruple loop around the
branch point.

+:----------------------------------+:----------------------------------+
| **Figure 13a**                    | **Figure 13b**                    |
|                                   |                                   |
| ![](http://                       | ![](http://                       |
| lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/ | lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/ |
| speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1 | speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1 |
| .trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymc | .trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymc |
| anada.org/wp-content/uploads/site | anada.org/wp-content/uploads/site |
| s/2/2010/02/part60figure13a.gif"} | s/2/2010/02/part60figure13b.gif"} |
| \<img                             | \<img                             |
| src=\"http://lymc                 | src=\"http://lymc                 |
| anada.org/wp-content/uploads/site | anada.org/wp-content/uploads/site |
| s/2/2010/02/part60figure13a.gif\" | s/2/2010/02/part60figure13b.gif\" |
| alt=\"\" />                       | alt=\"\" />                       |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------------------------+

+:----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| **Figure 13c**                                                        |
|                                                                       |
| ![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/pl                                |
| ugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://l |
| ymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure13c.gif"} |
| \<img                                                                 |
| src=\"http://l                                                        |
| ymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/part60figure13c.gif\" |
| alt=\"\" />                                                           |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

Here we have reached the limit of the power of this particular type of
complex function. To increase the function's power, a new principle must
be introduced, which will add a new singularity to the manifold of
physical action. With the incorporation of this new singularity, into
the manifold, a greater potential for action is achieved.

This defines a still higher type of transformation, one that adds new
singularities to the manifold of action. But in these algebraic
examples, these singularities are added one by one. Riemann showed, than
Abel's extended class of higher transcendental functions, when expressed
on Riemann's surface, express a type of transformation that increases
the rate and the density at which singularities can be added.

This part of the investigation will have to be continued until next
time. But, at least we have begun to scratch the surface.
:::

::: {.addtoany_share_save_container .addtoany_content_bottom}
::: {.a2a_kit .a2a_kit_size_32 .addtoany_list a2a-url="http://lymcanada.org/60/" a2a-title="Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 60 :  The Power To Change, Change"}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F60%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2060%20%3A%20%20The%20Power%20To%20Change%2C%20Change "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F60%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2060%20%3A%20%20The%20Power%20To%20Change%2C%20Change "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/google_plus?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F60%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2060%20%3A%20%20The%20Power%20To%20Change%2C%20Change "Google+"){.a2a_button_google_plus}
[](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd .addtoany_share_save}
:::
:::
:::

[ [ Posted on ]{.screen-reader-text} [February 20, 2010 February 24,
2019](http://lymcanada.org/60/) ]{.posted-on} [ [ [ Author
]{.screen-reader-text} [Bruce
Director](http://lymcanada.org/author/bdirector/){.url .fn .n} ]{.author
.vcard} ]{.byline} [ [ Categories ]{.screen-reader-text}
[EN](http://lymcanada.org/category/en/) , [Riemmann for
Anti-Dummies](http://lymcanada.org/category/science-1/c132-riemmann-for-anti-dummies/)
]{.cat-links}
