::: post-thumbnail
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part61_files_figure01-riemann61.gif){.attachment-post-thumbnail
.size-post-thumbnail .wp-post-image width="360" height="240"}
:::

::: entry-header
# Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 61 : To What End Do We Study Riemann's Investigation of Abelian Functions? {#riemann-for-anti-dummies-part-61-to-what-end-do-we-study-riemanns-investigation-of-abelian-functions .entry-title}
:::

::: entry-content
::: pf-content
::: {align="justify"}
March 5, 2005 (8:08pm)
:::

## To What End Do We Study Riemann's Investigation of Abelian Functions? {#to-what-end-do-we-study-riemanns-investigation-of-abelian-functions align="justify"}

by Bruce Director

On June 10, 1854, Bernhard Riemann shocked the world by stating the
obvious:\
For more than two thousand years scientists had accepted, as dogma, that
the axioms of Euclidean geometry were the only foundation for science,
despite the fact that science had been left in the dark as to whether
these axioms had any physical reality. "From Euclid to Legendre, to name
the most renowned writers on geometry, this darkness has been lifted
neither by the mathematicians nor by the philosophers who have labored
upon it." The axioms of Euclidean geometry are, Riemann said, "like all
facts, not necessary but of a merely empirical certainty; they are
hypotheses; one may therefore inquire into their probability, which is
truly very great within the bounds of observation, and thereafter decide
concerning the admissibility of protracting them outside the limits of
observation, not only toward the immeasurably large, but also toward the
immeasurably small." [ ]{#more-926}\
Though Riemann's words were welcomed by the aged Gauss, (who had long
held but rarely publically stated this view), they were inimical to the
Kantianism that had come to dominate a significant part of European
science since the oligarchy's suppression of Benjamin Franklin's
Leibnizian allies, that had accelerated with the French Revolution and
its aftermath. Kant and his successors had preached the evil doctrines
of a hermetic separation between the workings of the mind and the
physical world, and, a hermetic separation within the mind between
scientific and artistic thinking. The former dictated that man was
doomed to impose on the physical world the axioms of Euclidean geometry,
no matter what physical evidence contradicted it. The latter insisted
that man's mental processes were limited either to the cold logic that
Kant falsely attributed to science, or the unknowable irrationality that
he erroneously described as art.\
As a proponent of Friedrich Schiller's collaborator Herbart, and a
student of Abraham Kaestner's protege Gauss, Riemann saw through these
Kantian sophistries. Like Plato, Cusa, Kepler and Leibniz before him,
Riemann recognized that though sense perception cannot tell us anything
truthful about the physical universe, the mind's power to form
hypotheses can. Following Herbart, Riemann noted that such hypotheses
are not formed {a priori} as Kant insisted, but only by the mind's
investigation of physical causes. These hypotheses, Riemann emphasized,
must be constantly improved, "under the compulsion of facts that it
cannot explain."\
Thus, scientific progress occurs through a succession of paradoxes which
challenge the prevailing way of thinking. As Riemann wrote in his
posthumously published philosophical fragments:\
"Natural science is the attempt to understand nature by means of exact
concepts.\
"According to the concepts through which we comprehend nature, our
perceptions are supplemented and filled in, not simply at each moment
but also future perceptions are seen as necessary....\
"To the extent that what is necessary or probable, according to these
concepts, takes place, then this confirms the concepts, and the trust
that we place in these concepts rests on this confirmation through
experience. But if something takes place that is unexpected according to
our existing assumptions, i.e., that is impossible or improbable
according to them, then the task arises of completing them or, if
necessary, reworking the axioms, so that what is perceived ceases to be
impossible or improbable. The completion or improvement of the
conceptual system forms the \`explanation' of the unexpected perception.
Our comprehension of nature gradually becomes more and more complete and
correct through this process, simultaneously penetrating more and more
behind the surface of appearances....\
"Herbart furnished the proof that concepts that allow us to comprehend
the world...can be derived from this source (physical paradoxes--bmd),
in so far as they are more than mere forms combining simple sense
images; and therefore these concepts need not be derived from some
special constitution of the human mind which precedes all experience
(such as Kant's categories)."\
Thus truthful hypotheses can only arise from physical paradoxes. Yet
these paradoxes will not be recognized if the mind is girdled by an {a
priori} dogma, such as Kant's insistence on the primacy of Euclidean
geometry. Consequently, Riemann admonished his colleagues, they must be
willing to reflect on the general notions by which hypotheses concerning
physical processes are formed, so that, "the task shall not be hindered
by too restricted conceptions, and that progress in perceiving the
connection of things shall not be obstructed by the prejudices of
tradition."\
Here again Riemann is in direct contradiction to Kant. For the formation
of new hypotheses, by their very nature, must lie outside the "logic" of
any existing system of axioms, postulates and definitions. Therefore,
Kant's insistence that scientific knowledge is limited to a logical
system, limits knowledge. Scientific progress occurs through the
{creation} of new thoughts, in response to a conflict between existing
thoughts and the physical world. This conflict provokes an emotional
response in the mind of the scientist: "a powerful sense of wonder that
drives men to look into causes," as Kepler described it. Progress
occurs, contrary to Kant, because this creative process, for both the
scientist and artist alike, can be, and is, known.\
Lyndon LaRouche's unique discoveries in the science of physical economy
provide the only fully elaborated conception for the knowability of the
creative process. It is in this vein, and from this higher standpoint,
that Riemann's investigations of the complex domain must be approached.
A pedagogical investigation into Riemann's treatment of Abelian
functions acquaints us both with the physical paradoxes that provoked
Riemann's thought, and an insight into the creative process that enabled
him to make the discovery.

The Relationship of Mind and Physics

Riemann's approach was in the tradition of Pythagorean Sphaerics. When
ancient scientists invented the sphere they were not describing a
physical object. No one saw, in the sky, a great sphere. Yet as these
ancients moved their eyes around the sky, seeking to gain a greater
mastery over the world in which they lived, the idea of the sphere was
born. Its form expressed both the manifold of action on which the
ever-changing physical motions were projected into the visible domain,
{and}, the active relationship between these motions, and the minds that
were investigating their causes. It was, as Kepler later said, a first
assumption of reason, which, once conceived, secured a conceptual
platform from which deeper investigations could be pursued. That deeper
knowledge could be acquired, not by new experience alone, but only when
the investigators themselves recognized that such new experience obliged
them to change the platform on which they were standing.\
From this new platform, these celestial motions were seen not to conform
to the perfect circles which were characteristic of spherical action,
but to another, more complex mode of action. An early effort to grasp
this higher mode of action is expressed by Archytas's construction for
the doubling of the cube. There he demonstrated that the cube, which is
derived from the sphere, cannot be doubled within the spherical domain,
but only from the domain of the multiply-connected action from which the
torus, cylinder and cone are unfolded. When Kepler discovered the
harmonically ordered elliptical nature of planetary orbits, he was
confirming that it was this higher manifold of action, expressed by
Archytas's solution to doubling the cube, which was, in fact, the one
that characterized the planetary motions, whose visible projections were
traced on the celestial sphere.\
This is the spirit with which to approach the geometry that bears
Riemann's name. No one has ever "seen" a Riemann's surface, nor does
such a surface describe the visible appearance of some physical effect.
Rather, like the ancients' celestial sphere, Archytas's torus, cylinder
and cone, or Kepler's harmonically ordered elliptical orbits, Riemann's
surface expresses {the relationship between the physical principles,
their sensible effects, and our investigating minds}.\
There is, of course, an entire class of physical investigations, in
which Riemann was deeply and actively involved, whose understanding he
advanced by applying his concept of the complex domain, including
problems in geodesy, geomagnetism, astronomy, electrodynamics, and
hydrodynamics. But it was not merely the practical solutions that
Riemann sought. Such practical solutions, Riemann emphasized, flowed
only from the change in thinking required to discover the principles
upon which such physical effects depend--a change in thinking congruent
with that experienced in his treatment of Abelian functions.\
Just as Plato instructed the Delians to disregard the practical
applications of doubling the cube and to focus instead on the cognitive
improvements gained from its investigation, Riemann advised the
scientists of his day not to focus merely on methods for calculating the
transcendental functions, that Leibniz had shown, were the functions on
which all physical action was based. Instead, as Riemann noted in his
1857 treatise on Gauss's "Hypergeometric Function" , it is because of
the numerous applications of these transcendental functions to physical
and astronomical investigations, that a suitable representation of their
universal characteristics must be given. It is from this standpoint,
Riemann emphasized, that the calculations can be derived.\
In solving the problem of doubling the cube, the Greeks did not get
bigger altars. They got better minds. In designing his surfaces, Riemann
did not create a new means of computing. He created a new means of
thinking, and, just as important, laid the foundation for its successor.

The Physical Foundation of Complex Functions

Though the physical necessity of complex numbers was first indicated by
Leibniz, Gauss was the first to elaborate their rigorous foundations. In
his earliest notebook entries, his letters to collaborators, and his
published statements on the subject, Gauss always emphasized that the
significance of complex numbers was not their mathematical properties.
Rather, the mathematical properties of complex numbers were only
significant because they reflected physical characteristics.\
Illustrative of this view is Gauss's 1809 pedagogical exercise,
"Questions Concerning the Metaphysics of Mathematics", in which he
states that "mathematics in the most general sense is the science of
relationships..." Then, after sketching the mathematical properties of
complex numbers, which he describes as quantities that express "a
relationship between relationships", Gauss concludes this short note by
emphasizing that "it would be extremely important to bring to light this
theory inversely {without quantity}." He then describes the motion of
the spirit bubble in a plane leveller, as a physical example of what
mathematics would call a "complex number".\
Gauss included a statement of the physical foundation for complex
numbers in his 1832 "Second Treatise on Bi-quadratic Residues", the
which was cited by Riemann in his habilitation dissertation. There Gauss
identified complex numbers explicitly as {anti-Kantian}, insisting that
the very idea of complex numbers cannot even {arise} in the mind, nor be
communicated, {a priori}. Complex numbers, Gauss repeatedly emphasized,
arise only from the investigation of physical processes. It is
polemically ironic that Gauss would declare these physical foundations
for complex numbers in a treatise dedicated to the theory of numbers, a
subject that his enemies (and most academic fools today) would regard as
the domain of "pure mathematics".\
The physical foundation of complex numbers, for Gauss, was not simply a
matter of philosophical interest. His unequaled accomplishments in
geodesy, astronomy, geomagnetism, potential theory and conformal
mapping, all employ this quality to obtain physical results. Certain
aspects of Gauss's work in this regard have been treated in previous
installments of this series and more will be treated in the future.
However, for purposes of the present discussion, it is relevant to
illustrate this physical basis for complex functions from the standpoint
of Riemann's investigation of the relationship of complex functions and
surfaces of physical least-action known as minimal surfaces, typified by
the catenoid.\
Riemann's discovery depends on Gauss's method of spherical mapping,
which itself, was a generalization of the method of Pythagorean
Sphaerics. Over the ages, astronomers had measured the relationship
between the positions of stars on the celestial sphere from different
positions on the Earth. Such measurements were normalized by measuring
the angle of inclination of a star with respect to the direction of a
plumb bob. Through his work on geodesy, Gauss recognized that the plumb
bob points in the direction of the pull of gravity, and that the unseen,
but actual, surface of the Earth, is that surface that is everywhere
perpendicular to this direction. Thus, as the plumb bob is moved from
place to place around the Earth, its changing direction reflected the
changing curvature of the Earth's, unseen, gravitational surface. This
changing curvature is, in turn, reflects on the celestial sphere by
changes in the stars' angles of inclination as measured from different
positions on the Earth. In sum, the irregular changing curvature of the
Earth is mapped onto the regular curvature of the celestial sphere.\
Using this same approach, of mapping the changing directions of a normal
to a surface onto a sphere, Gauss established a standard for measuring
the curvature of any arbitrary surface. Such maps are now called "Gauss
spherical mappings".

This mapping is illustrated in animated figures 1 for the case of the
spheroid.

![](){height="240" width="360"}

The left panel of the animation shows a normal moving around a curve on
the spheroid. As the normal moves, its changing direction reflects the
changing curvature of the spheroid. In the right panel the changing
directions of this normal are mapped onto a sphere by a moving radius
whose direction is always parallel to the moving normal on the spheroid.
Gauss used the area of the spherical image as a measure of the curvature
of the original surface. The greater the variation in the curvature of
the surface, the greater the area of its spherical image, and vice
versa.\
Riemann focused on the unique characteristic of these Gauss spherical
mappings for surfaces of physical least-action, such as the catenoid.
For such surfaces, Riemann showed, the Gauss spherical map was always
conformal.

This is illustrated in figures 2a and b.

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure02a-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure02b-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}

Here we see the Gauss map of a collection of curves on a catenoid that
intersect at equal angles. Notice that the images of these curves in the
Gauss spherical map also intersect at equal angles. Hence, the Gauss
spherical map of the catenoid preserves angles, i.e., it is conformal.\
This is not the case for other surfaces, such as the hyperboloid
illustrated in figures 3a and b, and the spheroid illustrated in figures
4a and b.

3 a,b

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure03a-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure03b-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}

4 a,b

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure04a-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure04b-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}

In both cases the curves on the surface intersect at equal angles, but
the angles between their images on the spherical maps are different.
Hence, the Gauss spherical maps for these surfaces are not conformal.\
Riemann recognized that the conformality of the Gauss spherical maps of
minimal surfaces reflects the unique physical least-action
characteristic of such surfaces--specifically, that the rate of change
of the curves of minimum and maximum curvature is equal, or, in other
words, the minimum and maximum curves were harmonic. (See Riemann for
Anti-Dummies 58 and 60.) It is important to emphasize that this harmonic
relationship is an effect, not a cause. The physical principle of
least-action is the cause. That physical principle is expressed,
mathematically, in the harmonicity of the minimum and maximum curves,
and the conformality of the Gauss spherical maps. But this mathematical
property is not significant for abstract mathematical reason. It is
significant because it reflects a physical characteristic and in so
doing, assists us in forming, and communicating, a concept of the
essential characteristics of that physical principle.\
But, now Riemann went the next step and inverted the question. Following
Gauss, Riemann understood that complex functions, when represented
geometrically on a surface, produce conformal mappings. Consequently,
any complex function could be thought of as a Gauss spherical map of
some physical least-action surface. Such surfaces were not necessarily
visible objects. Rather, they expressed manifolds of physical
least-action, whose shadow, in the visible domain, is a conformal map.
Riemann showed we can work backwards from these conformal maps to
construct an image of the physical manifold of least-action. Such images
take the form of a Riemann's surface.

The Physical Foundation of Abelian Functions

The physical characteristic of complex functions, illustrated above for
minimal surfaces, is just a particular example of the more general case
of which Riemann spoke in his habilitation dissertation. There he poses
the questions, and proposes the direction by which the true
determination of physical relationships can be discovered. Once we have
rejected any {a priori} axiomatic assumptions, on what do we rely for
the determination of physical relationships? If we rely on the
relationships among objects of sense, we will know nothing about the
universal principles that lie outside the sensorial domain. But, Riemann
emphasized, if we cannot rely on the relationships observed among the
objects of sense, the basis for physical relationships "must be sought
for outside that actuality, in the colligating forces (Kraeften) that
operate upon it."\
By colligating forces, Riemann is referring to the universal physical
principles, which, being universal, are acting everywhere on the visible
domain from outside. As Leibniz showed in the initial development of the
infinitesimal calculus, the relationships among the discrete objects of
the visible domain are determined by the continuous, but differential,
action of universal principles. Riemann extended Leibniz's notion,
hypothesizing that when a physical process is the effect of a
multiplicity of universal principles, those principles can be thought of
as constituting a multiply-extended continuous manifold. But these
universal principles are not sensible. Therefore, Riemann said, "there
are in common life only such infrequent occasions to form concepts whose
modes of determination form a continuous manifold, that the positions of
objects of sense, and the colors, are probably the only simple notions
whose modes of determination form a multiply-extended manifold. More
frequent occasion for the birth and development of these notions is
first found in higher mathematics."\
In particular, Riemann notes, such concepts of multiply-extended
continuous manifolds arose in connection with his investigation of
Abelian functions. To further our understanding of these manifolds,
Riemann developed his method of representing them as Riemann's
surfaces.\
These Riemann's surfaces, like the Pythagorean sphere, Archytas's
construction, or Gauss's surfaces, are not visible objects. They are the
metaphorical images of thought-objects that express the relationships of
a multiplicity of insensible universal principles which are acting
together to produce a physical effect.\
From this standpoint, Riemann was able to demonstrate that the essential
characteristic of a multiply-extended continuous manifold is determined
by the density of singularities that that manifold could sustain. This
density of singularities, therefore, indicates the physical "power" or
"potential" of the manifold. Just as Gauss expressed the power of an
algebraic equation by a geometrical characteristic, Riemann showed that
the power of a species of functions can be expressed by the geometrical
characteristics of the Riemann's surface. These species characteristics,
Riemann emphasized, are the primary determinant of potential action in a
physical manifold while other factors, such as variations among
different functions of the same species, are of relatively little
importance.\
To better understand this concept, it is pedagogically most efficient to
work through a series of animations illustrating Riemann's surfaces,
associated with manifolds of action of increasing density and power.
Each type of Riemann's surface is illustrated through an ordered series
of animations, comprised of groups of triple-pairings showing the
various characteristics of the surface from three different viewpoints:
flat, 3D and stereographic projection. Each pair of animations shows an
animated trajectory within a continuous manifold of physical action, and
the effect on that trajectory of a complex function. To grasp the
concept of the Riemann's surface, the viewer must form a single idea of
the effect of the function from the three pairs of animations. The
function is not depicted directly in any of the animations. What is
depicted is merely the effect. {The function is the concept, formed in
the mind, of the characteristics of the principle which has the power to
produce the depicted effect}.\
However, as Riemann stressed, the change in density of singularities
expressed by a Riemann's surface depends, not on the particular
function, but only on the {species} of function (i.e. algebraic,
transcendental, elliptical, hyper-elliptical, etc.). Therefore, what is
important to know is not the characteristics of any particular function,
but the characteristics of a species of functions, and even more
importantly, the characteristic of change from one species of function
to a higher species.\
This is illustrated in the animations by grouping an entire set of
tripled-pairs into an ordered series illustrating the characteristic of
an entire species. That characteristic is not directly depicted visibly
in the animations. Rather it is evoked as a concept (thought-object)
when the mind recognizes the total potential of that species to produce
a change in the action. {It is this cognitive act, not the visible form,
that constitutes the concept of the complex function}.\
In this way, the entire set of animations walks the viewer through a
succession of cognitive leaps. First, the leap required to put a pair of
animations together. Then the leap required to put a tripled-pair into a
unified idea. Then, the leap from one tripled pair to the next within a
species. Then, the leap from species to species. Thus, it is not any
single animation that presents the idea, but the cognitive change that
is evoked as the viewer moves from one pair, to the triplet, from
triplet to triplet, and from species to species. The animations
themselves are not the idea. They are the vehicles by which the idea is
evoked in the mind of the viewer. The viewer can then reflect on the
succession of thought-objects that have been evoked through an
investigation of the succession of animations. Reflecting back on the
entire succession, the viewer can then form a single idea--a mental
animation--of the different qualities of change embedded in the
process.\
It is this {change of change} that forms an initial idea of Riemann's
concept of Abelian functions.\
What follows is a series of animations selected from a larger series
that was presented at the recent February 22, 2005 cadre school. (The
entire series can be downloaded from
<http://wlym.com/animations/riemann61.zip> ).\
Animations 5a,b, c; 6 a, b, c: and 7 a, b, c; illustrate the effect on a
closed trajectory encircling, none, two and four singularities, with
respect to an algebraic function.

5 a,b,c

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure05a-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure05b-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure05c-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}

6 a,b,c

![](){height="240" width="360"}
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure06b-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure06c-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}

7 a,b,c

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure07a-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure07b-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure07c-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}

The effect of the manifold of action on this trajectory is to increase
the number of rotations by the number of singularities encircled. Since,
in this example, the function is a fourth power algebraic function, the
maximum potential for change is a quadrupling of effect.

Animations 8a, b; show a different algebraic species of function with an
additional, but different, type of singularity--a pole.

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure08a-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure08b-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}

The effect of this type of singularity (pole) can only be seen in the
stereographic, spherical view. Here we see the importance of Riemann's
insistence on representing his surfaces in spherical form. By using the
stereographic projection, we can see the total potential of the
function-- even those effects which, in the plane, might not be evident
because they appear to be "infinitely" far away. Riemann's approach,
like Cusa's, treats the "infinite" not as an indication of something
outside the universe, but merely an indication that something is outside
our conceptual ken. With Riemann's stereographic mapping we rise above
that apparent limitation and recognize that it had only existed because
of a mind-deadening acceptance of Kant's insistence on the primacy of
Euclidean geometry.\
A single trajectory around this singularity is transformed into a triple
action around the "infinite", which is represented by the north pole of
the sphere in the stereographic projection.

Figure 8c depicts this relationship from the standpoint of a Gauss
surface.

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure8c-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}

From these four triplets, we can already form an idea of the essential
characteristic of the entire species of algebraic functions. As
discussed in the last installment, the number of sheets of a Riemann's
surface of an algebraic function is determined by the power of the
function. Thus, though any species of algebraic function will have the
potential to increase the effect of an action, depending on how many
singularities (roots or poles) that function can sustain, that potential
will always be finite. Further, as is evident from the spherical view,
all the roots will map to south pole of the sphere and all the poles
will map to north pole. Thus, the Riemann's surface for any algebraic
function will have only two branch-points, and a finite number of
branches.\
This limitation of a finite potential is only overcome (transcended), by
the higher species of function--the simple transcendental function. This
species is comprised of the exponential, circular and hyperbolic
functions. Again, the essential characteristics of these functions,
which are manifest physically by the catenary principle of least-action,
are easily grasped when viewed from the standpoint of the relevant
Riemann's surface. These surfaces are depicted in animations 9a, b, c;
10, a, b, c: and 11 a, b, c; which illustrate a complex circular
function (sine).

9 a,b,c

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure09a-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure09b-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure9c-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}

10 a,b,c

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure10a-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure10b-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure10c-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}

11 a,b,c

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure11a-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure11b-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure11c-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}

These functions are distinguished from the algebraic because they have
an unbounded potential. This can at first be illustrated in animations
9, which shows the effect of a transcendental manifold on two
perpendicular trajectories. In the left panels both trajectories appear
to extend into the "infinite". But in the right panel, one of the
trajectories is transformed into a periodic ellipse. The unbounded
nature of this periodicity can be seen in the stereographic view (9c).
In the left, both trajectories are seen to approach the "infinite"
represented by the north pole. On the right, the image of one of these
trajectories becomes periodic, while the other remains aperiodic. Since
the periodic trajectory is an image of an process on the left that is
unbounded, its periodicity is also unbounded.\
From this geometry we can see that a Riemann's surface of this species
of function will have two branch points, but an unbounded number of
branches. Hence, it expresses a greater power for action than any
possible algebraic function.\
Animations 10 show a trajectory that encircles no branch points.
Animations 11 shows a trajectory that encircles two branch points,
producing a doubling effect around each branch point.\
From these three triplets we can form a concept of the power of this
simplest species of transcendental. It surpasses the power of the
algebraic because its power is unbounded. But it exhibits a new type of
boundary, specifically, the limit imposed by having only two branch
points.\
This new type of boundary is overcome by the next species of
transcendental--the elliptical transcendental. This transcendental
species is associated with a manifold of physical action in which two
universal principles combine to produce one single effect. As, for
example, in the case of elliptical motion in which motion along the arc
of the ellipse is incommensurable with both the sine and the angle (as
distinct from circular motion in which the arc is incommensurable with
the sine, but commensurable with the angle).\
Riemann showed that the essential characteristic of the elliptical
transcendentals is expressed by the double periodicity of the action on
the Riemann's surface. (Gauss had already discovered this property by
1798, but never published his results. The extent of his work in this
area was not publically known until the 1890's.)\
Like the simple transcendentals, but unlike the algebraic, the
elliptical transcendentals have an unbounded potential. But, the
elliptical transcendentals surpass the power of the simple
transcendentals because they are doubly-periodic. This characteristic is
depicted in animations 12 a, b, c;

12 a,b,c

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure12a-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure12b-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}

This triplet depicts two perpendicular trajectories which, in the left
panels, appear to go off into the "infinite" being transformed into
unbounded but periodic trajectories, as depicted in the right panels.
Again, this characteristic can only be truly grasped from the viewpoint
of the stereographic projection. This double periodicity of the
elliptical transcendental produces, in the Riemann's surface, four
branch points and an unbounded number of branches.

Animations 13 a, b, c; 14 a, b, c; and 15 a, b, c; illustrate a
trajectory within this elliptical manifold circling two branch points,
two different branch points and all four branch points respectively.

13 a,b,c

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure13a-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure13b-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure13c-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}

14 a,b,c

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure14a-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure14b-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure14c-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}

15 a,b,c

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure15a-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure15b-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure15c-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}

From this standpoint, it can be easily seen that manifolds of physical
action characterized by the elliptical transcendentals, having the
potential to sustain a greater number of singularities (branch points),
have a potential to produce a greater physical effect and, as such, are
of a higher power than the simple transcendentals.\
Finally, think back on this entire process, from a standpoint above the
characteristics of each particular species of function. Think of the
power of mind by which you can conceive of an entire species of
functions by their power to sustain a greater density of singularities
and thus a greater power to produce a physical effect. Think of the
power of mind by which you can conceive of the power to change from one
species to the next higher species. Think of the power of mind by which
you can extend this thought beyond the elliptical and into that extended
class of transcendentals now known as Abelian functions.\
That is the power of mind through which, "progress in perceiving the
connection of things shall not be obstructed by the prejudices of
tradition."
:::

::: {.addtoany_share_save_container .addtoany_content_bottom}
::: {.a2a_kit .a2a_kit_size_32 .addtoany_list a2a-url="http://lymcanada.org/61/" a2a-title="Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 61 :  To What End Do We Study Riemann’s Investigation of Abelian Functions?"}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F61%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2061%20%3A%20%20To%20What%20End%20Do%20We%20Study%20Riemann%E2%80%99s%20Investigation%20of%20Abelian%20Functions%3F "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F61%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2061%20%3A%20%20To%20What%20End%20Do%20We%20Study%20Riemann%E2%80%99s%20Investigation%20of%20Abelian%20Functions%3F "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/google_plus?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F61%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2061%20%3A%20%20To%20What%20End%20Do%20We%20Study%20Riemann%E2%80%99s%20Investigation%20of%20Abelian%20Functions%3F "Google+"){.a2a_button_google_plus}
[](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd .addtoany_share_save}
:::
:::
:::

[ [ Posted on ]{.screen-reader-text} [February 20, 2010 February 24,
2019](http://lymcanada.org/61/) ]{.posted-on} [ [ [ Author
]{.screen-reader-text} [Bruce
Director](http://lymcanada.org/author/bdirector/){.url .fn .n} ]{.author
.vcard} ]{.byline} [ [ Categories ]{.screen-reader-text}
[EN](http://lymcanada.org/category/en/) , [Riemmann for
Anti-Dummies](http://lymcanada.org/category/science-1/c132-riemmann-for-anti-dummies/)
]{.cat-links}

::: post-thumbnail
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part61_files_figure01-riemann61.gif){.attachment-post-thumbnail
.size-post-thumbnail .wp-post-image width="360" height="240"}
:::

::: entry-header
# Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 61 : To What End Do We Study Riemann's Investigation of Abelian Functions? {#riemann-for-anti-dummies-part-61-to-what-end-do-we-study-riemanns-investigation-of-abelian-functions-1 .entry-title}
:::

::: entry-content
::: pf-content
::: {align="justify"}
March 5, 2005 (8:08pm)
:::

## To What End Do We Study Riemann's Investigation of Abelian Functions? {#to-what-end-do-we-study-riemanns-investigation-of-abelian-functions-1 align="justify"}

by Bruce Director

On June 10, 1854, Bernhard Riemann shocked the world by stating the
obvious:\
For more than two thousand years scientists had accepted, as dogma, that
the axioms of Euclidean geometry were the only foundation for science,
despite the fact that science had been left in the dark as to whether
these axioms had any physical reality. "From Euclid to Legendre, to name
the most renowned writers on geometry, this darkness has been lifted
neither by the mathematicians nor by the philosophers who have labored
upon it." The axioms of Euclidean geometry are, Riemann said, "like all
facts, not necessary but of a merely empirical certainty; they are
hypotheses; one may therefore inquire into their probability, which is
truly very great within the bounds of observation, and thereafter decide
concerning the admissibility of protracting them outside the limits of
observation, not only toward the immeasurably large, but also toward the
immeasurably small." [ ]{#more-926}\
Though Riemann's words were welcomed by the aged Gauss, (who had long
held but rarely publically stated this view), they were inimical to the
Kantianism that had come to dominate a significant part of European
science since the oligarchy's suppression of Benjamin Franklin's
Leibnizian allies, that had accelerated with the French Revolution and
its aftermath. Kant and his successors had preached the evil doctrines
of a hermetic separation between the workings of the mind and the
physical world, and, a hermetic separation within the mind between
scientific and artistic thinking. The former dictated that man was
doomed to impose on the physical world the axioms of Euclidean geometry,
no matter what physical evidence contradicted it. The latter insisted
that man's mental processes were limited either to the cold logic that
Kant falsely attributed to science, or the unknowable irrationality that
he erroneously described as art.\
As a proponent of Friedrich Schiller's collaborator Herbart, and a
student of Abraham Kaestner's protege Gauss, Riemann saw through these
Kantian sophistries. Like Plato, Cusa, Kepler and Leibniz before him,
Riemann recognized that though sense perception cannot tell us anything
truthful about the physical universe, the mind's power to form
hypotheses can. Following Herbart, Riemann noted that such hypotheses
are not formed {a priori} as Kant insisted, but only by the mind's
investigation of physical causes. These hypotheses, Riemann emphasized,
must be constantly improved, "under the compulsion of facts that it
cannot explain."\
Thus, scientific progress occurs through a succession of paradoxes which
challenge the prevailing way of thinking. As Riemann wrote in his
posthumously published philosophical fragments:\
"Natural science is the attempt to understand nature by means of exact
concepts.\
"According to the concepts through which we comprehend nature, our
perceptions are supplemented and filled in, not simply at each moment
but also future perceptions are seen as necessary....\
"To the extent that what is necessary or probable, according to these
concepts, takes place, then this confirms the concepts, and the trust
that we place in these concepts rests on this confirmation through
experience. But if something takes place that is unexpected according to
our existing assumptions, i.e., that is impossible or improbable
according to them, then the task arises of completing them or, if
necessary, reworking the axioms, so that what is perceived ceases to be
impossible or improbable. The completion or improvement of the
conceptual system forms the \`explanation' of the unexpected perception.
Our comprehension of nature gradually becomes more and more complete and
correct through this process, simultaneously penetrating more and more
behind the surface of appearances....\
"Herbart furnished the proof that concepts that allow us to comprehend
the world...can be derived from this source (physical paradoxes--bmd),
in so far as they are more than mere forms combining simple sense
images; and therefore these concepts need not be derived from some
special constitution of the human mind which precedes all experience
(such as Kant's categories)."\
Thus truthful hypotheses can only arise from physical paradoxes. Yet
these paradoxes will not be recognized if the mind is girdled by an {a
priori} dogma, such as Kant's insistence on the primacy of Euclidean
geometry. Consequently, Riemann admonished his colleagues, they must be
willing to reflect on the general notions by which hypotheses concerning
physical processes are formed, so that, "the task shall not be hindered
by too restricted conceptions, and that progress in perceiving the
connection of things shall not be obstructed by the prejudices of
tradition."\
Here again Riemann is in direct contradiction to Kant. For the formation
of new hypotheses, by their very nature, must lie outside the "logic" of
any existing system of axioms, postulates and definitions. Therefore,
Kant's insistence that scientific knowledge is limited to a logical
system, limits knowledge. Scientific progress occurs through the
{creation} of new thoughts, in response to a conflict between existing
thoughts and the physical world. This conflict provokes an emotional
response in the mind of the scientist: "a powerful sense of wonder that
drives men to look into causes," as Kepler described it. Progress
occurs, contrary to Kant, because this creative process, for both the
scientist and artist alike, can be, and is, known.\
Lyndon LaRouche's unique discoveries in the science of physical economy
provide the only fully elaborated conception for the knowability of the
creative process. It is in this vein, and from this higher standpoint,
that Riemann's investigations of the complex domain must be approached.
A pedagogical investigation into Riemann's treatment of Abelian
functions acquaints us both with the physical paradoxes that provoked
Riemann's thought, and an insight into the creative process that enabled
him to make the discovery.

The Relationship of Mind and Physics

Riemann's approach was in the tradition of Pythagorean Sphaerics. When
ancient scientists invented the sphere they were not describing a
physical object. No one saw, in the sky, a great sphere. Yet as these
ancients moved their eyes around the sky, seeking to gain a greater
mastery over the world in which they lived, the idea of the sphere was
born. Its form expressed both the manifold of action on which the
ever-changing physical motions were projected into the visible domain,
{and}, the active relationship between these motions, and the minds that
were investigating their causes. It was, as Kepler later said, a first
assumption of reason, which, once conceived, secured a conceptual
platform from which deeper investigations could be pursued. That deeper
knowledge could be acquired, not by new experience alone, but only when
the investigators themselves recognized that such new experience obliged
them to change the platform on which they were standing.\
From this new platform, these celestial motions were seen not to conform
to the perfect circles which were characteristic of spherical action,
but to another, more complex mode of action. An early effort to grasp
this higher mode of action is expressed by Archytas's construction for
the doubling of the cube. There he demonstrated that the cube, which is
derived from the sphere, cannot be doubled within the spherical domain,
but only from the domain of the multiply-connected action from which the
torus, cylinder and cone are unfolded. When Kepler discovered the
harmonically ordered elliptical nature of planetary orbits, he was
confirming that it was this higher manifold of action, expressed by
Archytas's solution to doubling the cube, which was, in fact, the one
that characterized the planetary motions, whose visible projections were
traced on the celestial sphere.\
This is the spirit with which to approach the geometry that bears
Riemann's name. No one has ever "seen" a Riemann's surface, nor does
such a surface describe the visible appearance of some physical effect.
Rather, like the ancients' celestial sphere, Archytas's torus, cylinder
and cone, or Kepler's harmonically ordered elliptical orbits, Riemann's
surface expresses {the relationship between the physical principles,
their sensible effects, and our investigating minds}.\
There is, of course, an entire class of physical investigations, in
which Riemann was deeply and actively involved, whose understanding he
advanced by applying his concept of the complex domain, including
problems in geodesy, geomagnetism, astronomy, electrodynamics, and
hydrodynamics. But it was not merely the practical solutions that
Riemann sought. Such practical solutions, Riemann emphasized, flowed
only from the change in thinking required to discover the principles
upon which such physical effects depend--a change in thinking congruent
with that experienced in his treatment of Abelian functions.\
Just as Plato instructed the Delians to disregard the practical
applications of doubling the cube and to focus instead on the cognitive
improvements gained from its investigation, Riemann advised the
scientists of his day not to focus merely on methods for calculating the
transcendental functions, that Leibniz had shown, were the functions on
which all physical action was based. Instead, as Riemann noted in his
1857 treatise on Gauss's "Hypergeometric Function" , it is because of
the numerous applications of these transcendental functions to physical
and astronomical investigations, that a suitable representation of their
universal characteristics must be given. It is from this standpoint,
Riemann emphasized, that the calculations can be derived.\
In solving the problem of doubling the cube, the Greeks did not get
bigger altars. They got better minds. In designing his surfaces, Riemann
did not create a new means of computing. He created a new means of
thinking, and, just as important, laid the foundation for its successor.

The Physical Foundation of Complex Functions

Though the physical necessity of complex numbers was first indicated by
Leibniz, Gauss was the first to elaborate their rigorous foundations. In
his earliest notebook entries, his letters to collaborators, and his
published statements on the subject, Gauss always emphasized that the
significance of complex numbers was not their mathematical properties.
Rather, the mathematical properties of complex numbers were only
significant because they reflected physical characteristics.\
Illustrative of this view is Gauss's 1809 pedagogical exercise,
"Questions Concerning the Metaphysics of Mathematics", in which he
states that "mathematics in the most general sense is the science of
relationships..." Then, after sketching the mathematical properties of
complex numbers, which he describes as quantities that express "a
relationship between relationships", Gauss concludes this short note by
emphasizing that "it would be extremely important to bring to light this
theory inversely {without quantity}." He then describes the motion of
the spirit bubble in a plane leveller, as a physical example of what
mathematics would call a "complex number".\
Gauss included a statement of the physical foundation for complex
numbers in his 1832 "Second Treatise on Bi-quadratic Residues", the
which was cited by Riemann in his habilitation dissertation. There Gauss
identified complex numbers explicitly as {anti-Kantian}, insisting that
the very idea of complex numbers cannot even {arise} in the mind, nor be
communicated, {a priori}. Complex numbers, Gauss repeatedly emphasized,
arise only from the investigation of physical processes. It is
polemically ironic that Gauss would declare these physical foundations
for complex numbers in a treatise dedicated to the theory of numbers, a
subject that his enemies (and most academic fools today) would regard as
the domain of "pure mathematics".\
The physical foundation of complex numbers, for Gauss, was not simply a
matter of philosophical interest. His unequaled accomplishments in
geodesy, astronomy, geomagnetism, potential theory and conformal
mapping, all employ this quality to obtain physical results. Certain
aspects of Gauss's work in this regard have been treated in previous
installments of this series and more will be treated in the future.
However, for purposes of the present discussion, it is relevant to
illustrate this physical basis for complex functions from the standpoint
of Riemann's investigation of the relationship of complex functions and
surfaces of physical least-action known as minimal surfaces, typified by
the catenoid.\
Riemann's discovery depends on Gauss's method of spherical mapping,
which itself, was a generalization of the method of Pythagorean
Sphaerics. Over the ages, astronomers had measured the relationship
between the positions of stars on the celestial sphere from different
positions on the Earth. Such measurements were normalized by measuring
the angle of inclination of a star with respect to the direction of a
plumb bob. Through his work on geodesy, Gauss recognized that the plumb
bob points in the direction of the pull of gravity, and that the unseen,
but actual, surface of the Earth, is that surface that is everywhere
perpendicular to this direction. Thus, as the plumb bob is moved from
place to place around the Earth, its changing direction reflected the
changing curvature of the Earth's, unseen, gravitational surface. This
changing curvature is, in turn, reflects on the celestial sphere by
changes in the stars' angles of inclination as measured from different
positions on the Earth. In sum, the irregular changing curvature of the
Earth is mapped onto the regular curvature of the celestial sphere.\
Using this same approach, of mapping the changing directions of a normal
to a surface onto a sphere, Gauss established a standard for measuring
the curvature of any arbitrary surface. Such maps are now called "Gauss
spherical mappings".

This mapping is illustrated in animated figures 1 for the case of the
spheroid.

![](){height="240" width="360"}

The left panel of the animation shows a normal moving around a curve on
the spheroid. As the normal moves, its changing direction reflects the
changing curvature of the spheroid. In the right panel the changing
directions of this normal are mapped onto a sphere by a moving radius
whose direction is always parallel to the moving normal on the spheroid.
Gauss used the area of the spherical image as a measure of the curvature
of the original surface. The greater the variation in the curvature of
the surface, the greater the area of its spherical image, and vice
versa.\
Riemann focused on the unique characteristic of these Gauss spherical
mappings for surfaces of physical least-action, such as the catenoid.
For such surfaces, Riemann showed, the Gauss spherical map was always
conformal.

This is illustrated in figures 2a and b.

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure02a-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure02b-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}

Here we see the Gauss map of a collection of curves on a catenoid that
intersect at equal angles. Notice that the images of these curves in the
Gauss spherical map also intersect at equal angles. Hence, the Gauss
spherical map of the catenoid preserves angles, i.e., it is conformal.\
This is not the case for other surfaces, such as the hyperboloid
illustrated in figures 3a and b, and the spheroid illustrated in figures
4a and b.

3 a,b

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure03a-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure03b-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}

4 a,b

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure04a-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure04b-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}

In both cases the curves on the surface intersect at equal angles, but
the angles between their images on the spherical maps are different.
Hence, the Gauss spherical maps for these surfaces are not conformal.\
Riemann recognized that the conformality of the Gauss spherical maps of
minimal surfaces reflects the unique physical least-action
characteristic of such surfaces--specifically, that the rate of change
of the curves of minimum and maximum curvature is equal, or, in other
words, the minimum and maximum curves were harmonic. (See Riemann for
Anti-Dummies 58 and 60.) It is important to emphasize that this harmonic
relationship is an effect, not a cause. The physical principle of
least-action is the cause. That physical principle is expressed,
mathematically, in the harmonicity of the minimum and maximum curves,
and the conformality of the Gauss spherical maps. But this mathematical
property is not significant for abstract mathematical reason. It is
significant because it reflects a physical characteristic and in so
doing, assists us in forming, and communicating, a concept of the
essential characteristics of that physical principle.\
But, now Riemann went the next step and inverted the question. Following
Gauss, Riemann understood that complex functions, when represented
geometrically on a surface, produce conformal mappings. Consequently,
any complex function could be thought of as a Gauss spherical map of
some physical least-action surface. Such surfaces were not necessarily
visible objects. Rather, they expressed manifolds of physical
least-action, whose shadow, in the visible domain, is a conformal map.
Riemann showed we can work backwards from these conformal maps to
construct an image of the physical manifold of least-action. Such images
take the form of a Riemann's surface.

The Physical Foundation of Abelian Functions

The physical characteristic of complex functions, illustrated above for
minimal surfaces, is just a particular example of the more general case
of which Riemann spoke in his habilitation dissertation. There he poses
the questions, and proposes the direction by which the true
determination of physical relationships can be discovered. Once we have
rejected any {a priori} axiomatic assumptions, on what do we rely for
the determination of physical relationships? If we rely on the
relationships among objects of sense, we will know nothing about the
universal principles that lie outside the sensorial domain. But, Riemann
emphasized, if we cannot rely on the relationships observed among the
objects of sense, the basis for physical relationships "must be sought
for outside that actuality, in the colligating forces (Kraeften) that
operate upon it."\
By colligating forces, Riemann is referring to the universal physical
principles, which, being universal, are acting everywhere on the visible
domain from outside. As Leibniz showed in the initial development of the
infinitesimal calculus, the relationships among the discrete objects of
the visible domain are determined by the continuous, but differential,
action of universal principles. Riemann extended Leibniz's notion,
hypothesizing that when a physical process is the effect of a
multiplicity of universal principles, those principles can be thought of
as constituting a multiply-extended continuous manifold. But these
universal principles are not sensible. Therefore, Riemann said, "there
are in common life only such infrequent occasions to form concepts whose
modes of determination form a continuous manifold, that the positions of
objects of sense, and the colors, are probably the only simple notions
whose modes of determination form a multiply-extended manifold. More
frequent occasion for the birth and development of these notions is
first found in higher mathematics."\
In particular, Riemann notes, such concepts of multiply-extended
continuous manifolds arose in connection with his investigation of
Abelian functions. To further our understanding of these manifolds,
Riemann developed his method of representing them as Riemann's
surfaces.\
These Riemann's surfaces, like the Pythagorean sphere, Archytas's
construction, or Gauss's surfaces, are not visible objects. They are the
metaphorical images of thought-objects that express the relationships of
a multiplicity of insensible universal principles which are acting
together to produce a physical effect.\
From this standpoint, Riemann was able to demonstrate that the essential
characteristic of a multiply-extended continuous manifold is determined
by the density of singularities that that manifold could sustain. This
density of singularities, therefore, indicates the physical "power" or
"potential" of the manifold. Just as Gauss expressed the power of an
algebraic equation by a geometrical characteristic, Riemann showed that
the power of a species of functions can be expressed by the geometrical
characteristics of the Riemann's surface. These species characteristics,
Riemann emphasized, are the primary determinant of potential action in a
physical manifold while other factors, such as variations among
different functions of the same species, are of relatively little
importance.\
To better understand this concept, it is pedagogically most efficient to
work through a series of animations illustrating Riemann's surfaces,
associated with manifolds of action of increasing density and power.
Each type of Riemann's surface is illustrated through an ordered series
of animations, comprised of groups of triple-pairings showing the
various characteristics of the surface from three different viewpoints:
flat, 3D and stereographic projection. Each pair of animations shows an
animated trajectory within a continuous manifold of physical action, and
the effect on that trajectory of a complex function. To grasp the
concept of the Riemann's surface, the viewer must form a single idea of
the effect of the function from the three pairs of animations. The
function is not depicted directly in any of the animations. What is
depicted is merely the effect. {The function is the concept, formed in
the mind, of the characteristics of the principle which has the power to
produce the depicted effect}.\
However, as Riemann stressed, the change in density of singularities
expressed by a Riemann's surface depends, not on the particular
function, but only on the {species} of function (i.e. algebraic,
transcendental, elliptical, hyper-elliptical, etc.). Therefore, what is
important to know is not the characteristics of any particular function,
but the characteristics of a species of functions, and even more
importantly, the characteristic of change from one species of function
to a higher species.\
This is illustrated in the animations by grouping an entire set of
tripled-pairs into an ordered series illustrating the characteristic of
an entire species. That characteristic is not directly depicted visibly
in the animations. Rather it is evoked as a concept (thought-object)
when the mind recognizes the total potential of that species to produce
a change in the action. {It is this cognitive act, not the visible form,
that constitutes the concept of the complex function}.\
In this way, the entire set of animations walks the viewer through a
succession of cognitive leaps. First, the leap required to put a pair of
animations together. Then the leap required to put a tripled-pair into a
unified idea. Then, the leap from one tripled pair to the next within a
species. Then, the leap from species to species. Thus, it is not any
single animation that presents the idea, but the cognitive change that
is evoked as the viewer moves from one pair, to the triplet, from
triplet to triplet, and from species to species. The animations
themselves are not the idea. They are the vehicles by which the idea is
evoked in the mind of the viewer. The viewer can then reflect on the
succession of thought-objects that have been evoked through an
investigation of the succession of animations. Reflecting back on the
entire succession, the viewer can then form a single idea--a mental
animation--of the different qualities of change embedded in the
process.\
It is this {change of change} that forms an initial idea of Riemann's
concept of Abelian functions.\
What follows is a series of animations selected from a larger series
that was presented at the recent February 22, 2005 cadre school. (The
entire series can be downloaded from
<http://wlym.com/animations/riemann61.zip> ).\
Animations 5a,b, c; 6 a, b, c: and 7 a, b, c; illustrate the effect on a
closed trajectory encircling, none, two and four singularities, with
respect to an algebraic function.

5 a,b,c

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure05a-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure05b-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure05c-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}

6 a,b,c

![](){height="240" width="360"}
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure06b-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure06c-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}

7 a,b,c

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure07a-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure07b-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure07c-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}

The effect of the manifold of action on this trajectory is to increase
the number of rotations by the number of singularities encircled. Since,
in this example, the function is a fourth power algebraic function, the
maximum potential for change is a quadrupling of effect.

Animations 8a, b; show a different algebraic species of function with an
additional, but different, type of singularity--a pole.

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure08a-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure08b-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}

The effect of this type of singularity (pole) can only be seen in the
stereographic, spherical view. Here we see the importance of Riemann's
insistence on representing his surfaces in spherical form. By using the
stereographic projection, we can see the total potential of the
function-- even those effects which, in the plane, might not be evident
because they appear to be "infinitely" far away. Riemann's approach,
like Cusa's, treats the "infinite" not as an indication of something
outside the universe, but merely an indication that something is outside
our conceptual ken. With Riemann's stereographic mapping we rise above
that apparent limitation and recognize that it had only existed because
of a mind-deadening acceptance of Kant's insistence on the primacy of
Euclidean geometry.\
A single trajectory around this singularity is transformed into a triple
action around the "infinite", which is represented by the north pole of
the sphere in the stereographic projection.

Figure 8c depicts this relationship from the standpoint of a Gauss
surface.

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure8c-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}

From these four triplets, we can already form an idea of the essential
characteristic of the entire species of algebraic functions. As
discussed in the last installment, the number of sheets of a Riemann's
surface of an algebraic function is determined by the power of the
function. Thus, though any species of algebraic function will have the
potential to increase the effect of an action, depending on how many
singularities (roots or poles) that function can sustain, that potential
will always be finite. Further, as is evident from the spherical view,
all the roots will map to south pole of the sphere and all the poles
will map to north pole. Thus, the Riemann's surface for any algebraic
function will have only two branch-points, and a finite number of
branches.\
This limitation of a finite potential is only overcome (transcended), by
the higher species of function--the simple transcendental function. This
species is comprised of the exponential, circular and hyperbolic
functions. Again, the essential characteristics of these functions,
which are manifest physically by the catenary principle of least-action,
are easily grasped when viewed from the standpoint of the relevant
Riemann's surface. These surfaces are depicted in animations 9a, b, c;
10, a, b, c: and 11 a, b, c; which illustrate a complex circular
function (sine).

9 a,b,c

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure09a-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure09b-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure9c-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}

10 a,b,c

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure10a-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure10b-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure10c-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}

11 a,b,c

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure11a-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure11b-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure11c-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}

These functions are distinguished from the algebraic because they have
an unbounded potential. This can at first be illustrated in animations
9, which shows the effect of a transcendental manifold on two
perpendicular trajectories. In the left panels both trajectories appear
to extend into the "infinite". But in the right panel, one of the
trajectories is transformed into a periodic ellipse. The unbounded
nature of this periodicity can be seen in the stereographic view (9c).
In the left, both trajectories are seen to approach the "infinite"
represented by the north pole. On the right, the image of one of these
trajectories becomes periodic, while the other remains aperiodic. Since
the periodic trajectory is an image of an process on the left that is
unbounded, its periodicity is also unbounded.\
From this geometry we can see that a Riemann's surface of this species
of function will have two branch points, but an unbounded number of
branches. Hence, it expresses a greater power for action than any
possible algebraic function.\
Animations 10 show a trajectory that encircles no branch points.
Animations 11 shows a trajectory that encircles two branch points,
producing a doubling effect around each branch point.\
From these three triplets we can form a concept of the power of this
simplest species of transcendental. It surpasses the power of the
algebraic because its power is unbounded. But it exhibits a new type of
boundary, specifically, the limit imposed by having only two branch
points.\
This new type of boundary is overcome by the next species of
transcendental--the elliptical transcendental. This transcendental
species is associated with a manifold of physical action in which two
universal principles combine to produce one single effect. As, for
example, in the case of elliptical motion in which motion along the arc
of the ellipse is incommensurable with both the sine and the angle (as
distinct from circular motion in which the arc is incommensurable with
the sine, but commensurable with the angle).\
Riemann showed that the essential characteristic of the elliptical
transcendentals is expressed by the double periodicity of the action on
the Riemann's surface. (Gauss had already discovered this property by
1798, but never published his results. The extent of his work in this
area was not publically known until the 1890's.)\
Like the simple transcendentals, but unlike the algebraic, the
elliptical transcendentals have an unbounded potential. But, the
elliptical transcendentals surpass the power of the simple
transcendentals because they are doubly-periodic. This characteristic is
depicted in animations 12 a, b, c;

12 a,b,c

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure12a-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure12b-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}

This triplet depicts two perpendicular trajectories which, in the left
panels, appear to go off into the "infinite" being transformed into
unbounded but periodic trajectories, as depicted in the right panels.
Again, this characteristic can only be truly grasped from the viewpoint
of the stereographic projection. This double periodicity of the
elliptical transcendental produces, in the Riemann's surface, four
branch points and an unbounded number of branches.

Animations 13 a, b, c; 14 a, b, c; and 15 a, b, c; illustrate a
trajectory within this elliptical manifold circling two branch points,
two different branch points and all four branch points respectively.

13 a,b,c

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure13a-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure13b-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure13c-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}

14 a,b,c

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure14a-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure14b-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure14c-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}

15 a,b,c

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure15a-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure15b-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure15c-riemann61.gif){height="240"
width="360"}

From this standpoint, it can be easily seen that manifolds of physical
action characterized by the elliptical transcendentals, having the
potential to sustain a greater number of singularities (branch points),
have a potential to produce a greater physical effect and, as such, are
of a higher power than the simple transcendentals.\
Finally, think back on this entire process, from a standpoint above the
characteristics of each particular species of function. Think of the
power of mind by which you can conceive of an entire species of
functions by their power to sustain a greater density of singularities
and thus a greater power to produce a physical effect. Think of the
power of mind by which you can conceive of the power to change from one
species to the next higher species. Think of the power of mind by which
you can extend this thought beyond the elliptical and into that extended
class of transcendentals now known as Abelian functions.\
That is the power of mind through which, "progress in perceiving the
connection of things shall not be obstructed by the prejudices of
tradition."
:::

::: {.addtoany_share_save_container .addtoany_content_bottom}
::: {.a2a_kit .a2a_kit_size_32 .addtoany_list a2a-url="http://lymcanada.org/61/" a2a-title="Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 61 :  To What End Do We Study Riemann’s Investigation of Abelian Functions?"}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F61%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2061%20%3A%20%20To%20What%20End%20Do%20We%20Study%20Riemann%E2%80%99s%20Investigation%20of%20Abelian%20Functions%3F "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F61%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2061%20%3A%20%20To%20What%20End%20Do%20We%20Study%20Riemann%E2%80%99s%20Investigation%20of%20Abelian%20Functions%3F "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/google_plus?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F61%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2061%20%3A%20%20To%20What%20End%20Do%20We%20Study%20Riemann%E2%80%99s%20Investigation%20of%20Abelian%20Functions%3F "Google+"){.a2a_button_google_plus}
[](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd .addtoany_share_save}
:::
:::
:::

[ [ Posted on ]{.screen-reader-text} [February 20, 2010 February 24,
2019](http://lymcanada.org/61/) ]{.posted-on} [ [ [ Author
]{.screen-reader-text} [Bruce
Director](http://lymcanada.org/author/bdirector/){.url .fn .n} ]{.author
.vcard} ]{.byline} [ [ Categories ]{.screen-reader-text}
[EN](http://lymcanada.org/category/en/) , [Riemmann for
Anti-Dummies](http://lymcanada.org/category/science-1/c132-riemmann-for-anti-dummies/)
]{.cat-links}
