::: post-thumbnail
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.attachment-post-thumbnail
.size-post-thumbnail .wp-post-image width="500" height="83"
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure01-riemann62.gif"}

\<img width=\"500\" height=\"83\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure01-riemann62.gif\"
class=\"attachment-post-thumbnail size-post-thumbnail wp-post-image\"
alt=\"\" />
:::

::: entry-header
# Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 62 : On the Continuum of the Discontinuum {#riemann-for-anti-dummies-part-62-on-the-continuum-of-the-discontinuum .entry-title}
:::

::: entry-content
::: pf-content
## On the Continuum of the Discontinuum {#on-the-continuum-of-the-discontinuum align="justify"}

by Bruce Director

In the Laws, Plato's Athenian stranger laments that the Greek people's
pervasive ignorance of the incommensurability of a line with a surface
and a surface with a solid, had rendered them more like "guzzling swine"
than true human beings. While the same lament can be sounded with
respect to today's society, modern citizens must also include an
understanding of those higher transcendentals which are the subject of
Riemann's "Theory of Abelian Functions", if they are to avoid the
lamentable fate of Plato's fellow Greeks. To rectify this condition,
Plato recommended that these subjects should be learned in childhood,
through play. [ ]{#more-957} Yet those who, today, have already
graduated from that stage in life should, nevertheless, not despair. For
them such knowledge can still be assimilated through that form of fun
that has come to be known as pedagogical exercises, provided that one
approaches this play with the zeal and eagerness of youth. What Plato
considered most important to glean from this play is not the facts (such
as, that an area can not be measured by a line, or that a volume can not
be measured by an area), but the cognitive experience of discovering the
underlying principle implied by the incommensurability of these three
different types of action. Through this experience the mind recognizes
its power to recognize what Plato called "powers", so that when
confronted with "facts", it recognizes, as Riemann did, that all facts
are hypotheses, and it is attracted not to the factual statements by
themselves, but to the underlying principles on which the hypotheses,
implied by the existence of such facts, are based. These principles,
thus recognized as thought-objects, become a proper, and necessary,
subject for further investigation. From investigations typified by the
discovery of the incommensurability of the line, square and cube, we
learn of the relationship between objects of sense and the underlying
principles that govern their characteristics. For the relationships
among principles and those relationships to the mind, we must turn to
the subject of Riemann's "Theory of Abelian Functions". From that
standpoint, let us continue our pedagogical investigation of Riemann's
work.

Discreteness and Continuity

While the principles for the first type of investigation were well
established by the Pythagorean science of Sphaerics, to which Plato's
comments refer, their most general, modern elaboration was laid down by
Riemann in his 1854 habilitation dissertation. Generalizing the method
that had been developed by the successive accomplishments of Cusa,
Kepler, Leibniz and Gauss, Riemann set forth the fundamental basis by
which scientific investigations into the effect of physical principles
on the objects of sense must proceed--without the anti-scientific
presumption of the {a priori} axioms, postulates and definitions of
Euclidean geometry. Riemann rejected Kant's insistence that the
characteristics of Euclidean geometry were "hard- wired" into the human
mind. Instead of this Aristotelean dogma, Riemann recognized that the
mind understands physical processes by forming concepts of a
multiply-extended manifold whose characteristics are determined by
physical principles, or "modes of determination" (Bestimungsweissen)
that govern that action. These modes of determination can never be given
{a priori}, but must be discovered by the unique experiments that test
the underlying hypotheses on which the concept of the manifold is based.
Thus, the nature of the physical process can only be understood in
relation to the essential physical characteristics of the manifold. The
number of principles acting on the manifold (extension), and the metric
relations determined by those principles (curvature), are identified by
Riemann as such fundamental characteristics. In the {Theory of Abelian
Functions}, Riemann includes the density of singularities among the
essential characteristics. Again, these characteristics, cannot be given
{a priori}, but are determined by the physical characteristics of the
action under investigation. To illustrate this point, look at the
oft-cited example of the principle of least-action as expressed by light
undergoing reflection and refraction. In the former, the principle of
least- action is expressed by the invariant characteristic that the path
of light from the object, to the mirror, to the eye, is always the
shortest distance. Because this characteristic is reflected by the
equality of the angle of incidence and the angle of reflection, this
least-action effect can be completely measured simply by one mode of
determination, specifically the angle of incidence. Thus, the
experimental investigation of reflected light can be grasped by the mind
through a concept of a simply-extended manifold. However, under
refraction, this same principle of least-action is expressed not by the
path of shortest distance, but by the path of shortest time, which can
only be completely measured by the angle of incidence, {and} the index
of refraction (the difference in the effect of the density of the two
media on the velocity of light). Consequently, two modes of
determination are necessary to determine position with respect to
refraction, and thus, comprehending refraction, requires the formation
of a concept of a doubly-extended manifold. Riemann makes a further
distinction between manifolds: "According as there is, or is not, a
continuous transition from one to another, they form a continuous or
discrete manifold; the individual modes are called, in the first case,
points, in the latter case, elements of the manifold." The objects of
sense comprise, as Riemann noted, a discrete manifold, in which the
"principle of metric relations is implicit in the notion of the
manifold" and, "comparison as to quantity occurs by counting". The
objects of such a discrete manifold are distinguished from one another
by their differing physical characteristics. Thus, they are not counted
with respect to {a priori} considerations, but only with respect to the
characteristic modes of determination of the manifold under which they
are being investigated. For example, it would not be possible to count
the number of persons in a room by counting the living creatures in that
room with four legs. (Unless, of course, the room included Nobel prize
winning economists, or officials of the Bush Administration.) But, as
Cusa and Kepler had insisted, and as Leibniz expressed it through his
calculus, universal physical principles are acting continuously, albeit
differentially, on the objects of sense from outside the domain of sense
perception. Consequently, Riemann insisted, to comprehend the principles
governing the objects of sense, we must seek the metric relationships
outside the visible domain "in the colligating forces that operate upon
it." Thus, for the investigation of the effect of {continuously acting
physical principles} on discrete physical objects, we must form concepts
of a multiply-extended continuous manifold. Riemann notes that common
experience affords only a few examples of such multiply-extended
continuous manifolds (the manifold of positions of objects in space and
the manifold of all colors are the two examples cited by Riemann).
Nevertheless, concepts of such manifolds arise when investigating
physical processes that are governed by the colligating action of
multiple principles. The geometrical expression for such manifolds can
be formed in the complex domain, in the context of the investigation of
those higher transcendentals known as "Abelian functions". A simple
illustration of the principle of the latter (which is relevant for what
follows), can be accomplished by rethinking one's naive concept of
circular action. From the naive standpoint, the circle seems to be a
simple closed curve. But what makes possible this simple circular curve?
From the standpoint of Gauss and Riemann, this simple circular curve is
the visible effect of the connected interaction of two continuously
changing transcendental functions the sine and the cosine. Formal
geometricians will find this way of thinking very uncomfortable, because
from the formal standpoint, the circle seems simple and the circular
functions seem complex. But, as Gauss demonstrated with his first
discovery concerning the division of the circle, it is only from the
standpoint of this inversion, that even the most simple propositions
concerning the circle (such as the construction of the regular polygons)
can be determined. Another heuristic for the same idea, is the case of
the Leibniz-Bernoulli successful determination of the catenary, in
contrast to Galileo's impotent pretension. Whereas Galileo fixated on
attempting to describe the visible shape of the chain, Leibniz and
Bernoulli investigated the continuously acting principles that
determined that shape from outside the visible domain. This Leibniz
-Bernoulli collaboration proved that the visible shape of the catenary
was the effect of the connected interaction between the continuously
changing effects of gravity and tension, the which could be measured as
the arithmetic mean between two contrariwise (transcendental)
exponential curves. In both these cases, the visible curves (circle and
catenary) are understood as the physical effect of two, distinct but
connected, modes of determination whose concept forms a doubly- extended
manifold. Anther example of the method by which we investigate this
relationship between continuous manifolds and their effects on the
discrete objects of sense is investigated, was given by Gauss in his
1832 investigation of magnetism: "To explain magnetic phenomena, we
assume two magnetic fluxes: one we call north, the other south. We
presuppose, that the elements of the one flux attract those of the
other, and that on the other hand, two elements of the same flux
mutually repel each other, and that each of hte two effects alters in
inverse relation to the square of the distance. It will be shown below
that the correctness of this law was itself confirmed by our
observations. "These fluxes do not occur independently, but only in
association with the ponderable particles of such bodies which take on
magnetism, and their effects express themselves either when they put the
bodies into motion or they prevent or transform the motion, which other
forces acting on these bodies, e.g. the force of gravity, would elicit.
"Hence the effect of a given amount of magnetic flux on a given amount
of either the same or the opposite flux at a given distance is
comparable to a given motive force, i.e. with the effect of a given
accelerating force on a given mass, and since the magnetic fluxes
themselves can be known only through the effects, which they bring
forth, the latter must directly serve to measure the former."

A Higher Continuity

But there is a still deeper expression of this relationship between
discrete and continuous manifolds that will take us directly to the
subject of Riemann's investigation of Abelian functions. This can be
preliminarily illustrated by illuminating the above referenced
investigation of Plato with light from Gauss' and Riemann's complex
domain. If we think of the line, surface and volume as paradigmatic of,
respectively, simply, doubly and triply extended continuous manifolds,
the following paradox emerges: within each manifold there is a clear
continuity of action, yet there is no continuous transition from one to
the other. For example, while a point can move continuously within a
line, once the line itself is moved, it forms a surface. The transition
from line to surface is discontinuous. There is no in- between state
where the mainfold is part line and part surface. It is either all one
or all the other. Similarly, there can be continuous motion within a
surface, but once the surface itself is moved, it suddenly becomes a
volume. Further as Plato emphasizes, the metric relations of the line
square and cube are incommensurable with each other. For example, the
metric relations of a line are inadequate to measure a square.
Consequently, a line adequate to measure a square, must be produced from
a square, not a line. In other words, the metric relations for such a
line must be sought outside the line-- in a the manifold of squares, in
which lines exist only as sides of squares. Such apparent
discontinuities , among continuities, point us toward a higher
continuity, which is continuously acting, as a manifold of manifolds, in
which these discontinuities exist simultaneously. This simultaneous
continuity is not located in the manifolds themselves but in the
cognitive effect of the transition from one manifold to another. Take a
close look at this paradox from the standpoint of the method of Archytas
for doubling the cube, in which the line, area and volume are thought of
as the principles that produce, respectively, zero, one and two
geometric means between two extremes.

Animated figure 1 depicts the continuous motion of a point (Q) within a
simply extended manifold (line).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-927
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure01-riemann62-1.gif"
height="83" width="500"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-927\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure01-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"83\" width=\"500\" />

Animated figure 2 depicts that same continuous motion of (Q) but now it
is occurring in a doubly-extended manifold, and is connected to the
circular motion of (P).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-928
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure02-riemann62-1.gif"
height="304" width="500"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-928\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure02-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"304\" width=\"500\" />

In animated figure 3, this connected motion of figure 2 is now occurring
in a triply-extended manifold, as the connected action of (P) and (Q) is
now rotated within a toroidal surface.

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-929
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure03-riemann62-1.gif"
height="370" width="360"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-929\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure03-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"370\" width=\"360\" />

In each case, the motion of (Q) is simply in one direction along a line,
but the manifold in which that simple motion occurs increases,
discontinuously, from "n" to "n+1" with the addition of each new degree
of action. This effect of the addition of each new degree of action is
reflected on the characteristics of the motion of (Q). In figure 1 the
motion of (Q) along line AO is uniform. But when (Q) is connected to a
line perpendicular to AO, whose opposite endpoint (P) is moving
uniformly on a circle, (Q)'s motion along AO becomes non-uniform.
Further, when line AO is rotated uniformly about (O), (P)'s motion along
the circle becomes non-uniform and the non-uniform motion of (Q) along
AO is changed again. The addition of each new degree of action can be
measured as a change in the rate of motion of (Q) along line AO . But
while the path of (Q) is always linear, its motion becomes increasingly
non-linear. Further, in each case, the metric of Q's motion along line
AO cannot be found with respect to Q's position within line AO, but must
be sought outside line AO, in the relationship of AO to the circle and
the torus, respectively. The motion of (Q) is always continuous, and,
the effect of (P) on (Q)'s motion is continuous, and the effect of (A)'s
motion on (Q) is continuous. But the transitions of the manifold from
when (Q)'s motion is being determined by (Q) alone, to being determined
by the effect of (P), to being determined by the connected effect of (A)
and (P), are discontinuous. Yet as Archytas's construction implies,
there exists a higher, cognitive continuity, that unifies, as if from
outside, the discontinuities among these three manifolds of action. A
similar point can be made from the standpoint of Gauss's geometrical
proof of the fundamental theorem of algebra. From the perspective of
formal algebra, the terms of an equation such as x\^2+x+1=0 are
distinguished from one another simply by how many times "x" is
multiplied by itself. (2 for the first term, 1 for the second and 0 for
the third.) But from the standpoint of physical geometry, the highest
term indicates a degree of extension that determines the governing
characteristics of the entire function. In other words, in the above
example, we are not adding a square to a line to a point. Rather, the
"x\^2" is an area (x by x) and so is the "x" (x by 1)and so is the "1"
(1by 1). But if those same terms are subsumed into a cubic equation,
x\^3+x\^2+x+1=0, they are all transformed into volumes. (For example,
the "x\^2" in the cubic equation is no longer an x by x area, but is
transformed into a x by x by 1 volume.) In his proof of the fundamental
theorem of algebra, Gauss created a higher geometry that expressed the
continuity within any single algebraic power with respect to that
power's discontinuous relationship to all other algebraic powers. Thus,
Gauss's higher geometry expresses the discontinuities between the
algebraic powers, {cognitively} as an effect of a simultaneous
continuity. What Gauss accomplished with his studies of algebraic
powers, Riemann achieved for that succession of transcendental species
of powers, known as "Abelian functions".

The Circle in the Complex Domain

Before turning directly to Riemann's accomplishment, let us secure our
footing by looking at Gauss's earliest discovery the division of the
circle, from the vantage point of Riemann's work. As was already known
to the Pythagorean geometers, the principle on which the division of the
circle into equal parts depends, can not be found in the circle itself.
As Kepler summarizes this knowledge in the first book of the Harmony of
the World, the division of the circle into equal parts by magnitudes
that are constructable (knowable) from the circle and its diameter is
limited--a characteristic that from the Pythagoreans onward was
recognized as the futility of achieving any universal knowledge from the
so-called straight-edge and compass constructions. Though this
limitation was recognized from the Pythagoreans through Kepler, it was
not until Gauss looked at the matter from the standpoint of the complex
domain, that the{ principle} on which this limitation is based was
known. Since we have treated Gauss's discovery of the division of the
circle in previous installments of this series and in numerous oral
presentations, we focus here only on the general considerations. First
we must extricate our mind from its attachment to the idea that a circle
is a self- evident object in visible space, which we divide into "n"
visible pieces to form an "n" sided polygon. Instead, think of a circle
divided into "n" distinct parts as the result of a single generating
principle in which the "n" parts are intrinsic to manifold. This can be
done when the circle is considered to be a special type of pathway in a
manifold of action in which the pathways of least action are always
logarithmic spirals. Such a manifold can be expressed by the complex
exponential (See Figure 4.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-930
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure04-riemann62-1.gif"
height="500" width="500"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-930\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure04-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"500\" width=\"500\" />

While there is an unlimited possibility for variation among these
logarithmic spirals, depending on the rate of growth of the spiral, such
unlimited possibility is {not} unbounded. The minimum-maximum
relationship bounding this manifold is expressed by the spirals with
maximum rotation and minimum extension, which are called "circles" and
the spirals of maximum extension and minimum rotation, which are called,
"straight lines". The metric relation intrinsic to this
"exponential-logarithmic" manifold can be expressed by the relationship
between how a change in position along a spiral pathway is measured by
an angle and how that same change in position is measured by a change in
the length of the corresponding arc or radial line. (Note that the arc
and radial line are both spiral pathways.) (See figure 5).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-931
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure05-riemann62-1.gif"
height="318" width="465"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-931\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure05-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"318\" width=\"465\" />

This relationship is that equal angles correspond to exponential changes
in arc length. Thus, an increase of the angle by "n" increases the
corresponding arc length by the "nth" power. (For example, a change in
position measured by a doubling of an angle corresponds to squaring of
the arc length along the spiral path.) (See Figure 6)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-932
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure06-riemann62-1.gif"
height="318" width="465"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-932\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure06-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"318\" width=\"465\" />

However, for that special type of logarithmic spiral known as a circle,
the equal angles correspond to equal arcs. But the intrinsic logarithmic
characteristic of the spiral is, nevertheless, embedded in the circle as
well and it is expressed in the relationship of the angle to the sine
and the cosine, when that relationship is expressed in the complex
domain. (See Figure 7).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-933
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure07-riemann62-1.gif"
height="525" width="500"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-933\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure07-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"525\" width=\"500\" />

Thus, dividing a circle into "n" parts corresponds to finding "n" powers
within an angle of 360 degrees. This principle can be expressed by the
simple algebraic expression, "x\^n-1=0". This can be grasped intuitively
by looking at animated figure 8 which depicts the complex cubing
function. In the animation, the cubing function triples the angles swept
out in the left panel, the effect of which is depicted in the right
panel.

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-934
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure08-riemann62-1.gif"
height="200" width="300"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-934\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure08-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"200\" width=\"300\" />

Thus, the vertices of a regular triangle are the points of discontinuity
where the action on the left sweeps out one complete circle on the
right. This is depicted in the animation by a change of color. For what
follows it is useful to also look at this same action by inversion as
depicted in animated figure 9.

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-935
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure09-riemann62-1.gif"
height="200" width="300"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-935\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure09-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"200\" width=\"300\" />

Here we see the black circle on the right, simultaneously, sweeping out
three unique circular segments on the left. Seen in this way, the
vertices of an "n" sided polygon can be understood as "n"
discontinuities produced by the continuous action of an algebraic
function of the "nth" power. This gives rise to a new form of the same
paradox cited above with respect to Plato's investigation of the
incommensurability of the line, square and cube. In the complex domain,
an "nth" power algebraic function produces, by a continuous process,"n"
discontinuities, but it can never produce "n+1" such discontinuities.
The transition from "n" to "n+1" is itself discontinuous, but it
signifies a higher type of discontinuity, than that expressed by the
vertices of a regular polygon. Further, though each lower power
signifies a manifold containing "n" discontinuities, the succession of
higher discontinuities in the transitions from "n" to "n+1" to "n+2",
etc. , when considered simultaneously, imply a cognitively generated
new, higher, type of continuity. Now, look at this paradox further from
the standpoint of Cusa's determination of the transcendental nature of
the circle. If an "n" sided polygon is produced by an algebraic function
of the "nth" power, the power of the function that produces the circle
must be infinite, and therefore, outside the domain of algebra. It
exists in the domain that Leibniz called transcendental, which subsumes
all possible algebraic relationships. Thus, the transcendental power
that generates the circle, generates, simultaneously, the discontinuous
manifold of all possible regular polygons.

A Higher Discontinuity

While the discontinuous manifold of the algebraic powers is bounded by
the simple transcendental power that generates the circle, our
investigations of the physical universe demand that we find conceptions
of manifolds of still greater power. The path on which to look for such
conceptions was discovered by Gauss, Abel, Dirichlet and Jacobi, but its
illumination we owe to Riemann. That path is not free of obstacles. In
fact, it is the obstacles we seek and with Riemann's beacon we can find
them. The first obstacle we seek is that which bounds the simple
transcendental power that generates the circle. But to find it in the
visible circle itself would be futile, as the visible circle appears to
be obviously unbounded. Nevertheless, that boundary, of the domain of
simple transcendentals, emerges clearly when we look, with the aid of
Riemann's surfaces, at the circle as an inversion from the circular
functions. As was illustrated in the last installment of this series,
the essential characteristic of the simple transcendental functions is
that they are simply-periodic. This characteristic is evident from the
visible expression of the circular functions, for as the sine goes from
0 to 1 to 0 to -1, the angle rotates counterclockwise around a circle.
Thus, while the circular angle has an unbounded potential, the circular
sine is always bounded between 1 and -1. An insight into the importance
of this can be gleaned from posing this relationship as an inversion.
The question, "what is the sine of an angle?" has only one answer, but
the question, "what is the arc that has this sine?" has an unlimited
number of answers. The crucial implications of this simply-periodic
characteristic can be most easily seen by, as we did above, looking
first at the complex circular functions from the more general
expression, the complex exponential, which, as we saw, is a manifold of
action in which the least-action pathways are logarithmic spirals. It is
evident from the intrinsic geometry of the spiral, especially when
viewed from the standpoint of the Riemann sphere, that this manifold has
two singularities, which on the Riemann sphere are the north and south
pole. (See figure 10.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-936
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure10-riemann62-1.gif"
height="516" width="500"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-936\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure10-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"516\" width=\"500\" />

In this manifold, circles, are simply those spirals that rotate around
the poles but do not extend to them. "Straight" lines are simply the
spirals that extend to the poles but do not rotate. Like all the other
spirals in this manifold, these limiting cases are also bounded by the
poles. Riemann recognized that a manifold with two singularities was
intrinsic to the characteristics of spherical geometry. Consequently, he
defined spherical geometry as the geometry of manifolds of two
singularities. However, as was also illustrated in the last installment,
the singularities exemplified by the poles of the complex exponential in
a Riemann's surface, are a special type of singularity, which Riemann
called, "branch points." This is due to the fact that since the complex
exponential is periodic in one direction (the "latitudinal" direction),
each rotation must add another layer, or, "branch" to the manifold. (See
figure 11).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-937
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure11-riemann62-1.gif"
height="288" width="432"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-937\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure11-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"288\" width=\"432\" />

Thus, the Riemann surface that depicts the manifold of the complex
exponential is a sphere with an unlimited number of layers, joined at
the north and south pole. A "branch cut" is made from one pole to the
other. Any action that crosses this cut, crosses onto the next layer.
Consequently, action in the "latitudinal" direction, necessarily crosses
the branch cut, while action in the "longitudinal" direction necessarily
does not. From this perspective we can now understand the circular
functions as a complex exponential whose branch points have been rotated
from the poles, to the points representing 1 and -1 on the equator. (The
hyperbolic functions are simply the simple transcendentals with branch
points at i and -i, thus completing the simple transcendental domain.)
The branch cut now extends from these points on the equator to the north
pole. (See Figure 12).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-938
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure12-riemann62-1.gif"
height="516" width="500"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-938\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure12-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"516\" width=\"500\" />

Just like the complex exponential, any action that crosses this branch
cut, crosses over onto another layer of the Riemann's surface. A further
insight into this characteristic is gained by looking more closely into
the Riemann's surfaces for the circular functions. In animated figure 13
the left panel shows a rotation going from -90 degrees to 90 degrees
while the right panel shows the sine going from -1 to 1.

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-939
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure13-riemann62-1.gif"
height="288" width="432"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-939\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure13-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"288\" width=\"432\" />

In animated figure 14 this rotation is continued, but as it starts back
toward the beginning it crosses the branch cut. This produces a
corresponding discontinuous jump in the sine as it moves back from 1 to
-1.

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-940
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure14-riemann62-1.gif"
height="288" width="432"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-940\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure14-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"288\" width=\"432\" />

However action in an orthogonal direction does not cross the branch cut
and is consequently, unbounded. (See animated figure 15).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-941
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure15-riemann62-1.gif"
height="288" width="432"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-941\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure15-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"288\" width=\"432\" />

This difference can be seen more completely when viewed from the
standpoint of the Riemann sphere. (See animated figures 16).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-942
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure16a-riemann62-1.gif"
height="288" width="432"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-942\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure16a-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"288\" width=\"432\" />
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-943
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure16b-riemann62-1.gif"
height="288" width="432"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-943\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure16b-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"288\" width=\"432\" />

Armed with this Riemannian view of simple transcendentals we can see
that the essential characteristics of simply periodic manifolds are
expressed by the intrinsic existence of two branch points. Such
manifolds arise from the investigation of physical processes which can
be understood as the effect of the transcendental action of only one
principle. For example, in simple uniform circular motion, the sine is
transcendental with the arc, but the arc is uniform with the angle. Or,
in the case of the catenary, the gravitational effect varies but the
tension is always constant. However, as the "Kepler Problem"
illustrates, in non-uniform physical motion, two or more transcendental
principles are acting, connectedly and simultaneously, to produce the
perceived physical effect. For example, in the case of elliptical
action, the sine is incommensurable with the arc, but the arc is also
incommensurable, according to a different principle, with the angle. (A
similar type of double incommensurability arises when expressing the
relationship of the varying period of a circular pendulum the angle
formed by the string and the vertical.) Gauss, Abel and Jacobi all
recognized that these types of physical action could only be expressed
by a higher type of transcendental a transcendental function that had
the power to unify two connected but distinct transcendental actions.
However, a clear and elementary understanding of these transcendentals
is only possible from the vantage point of Riemann's surfaces. To
intuitively grasp the concept of these higher transcendentals, let us
investigate how the elliptical transcendentals are distinguished from
simple transcendentals by the characteristics of their corresponding
Riemann's surface. As Gauss demonstrated for the case of the lemniscate,
the characteristic of the elliptical transcendentals are distinguished
by their double periodicity. Riemann showed that this characteristic of
double periodicity implied a distinctly different manifold of action
than the spherical manifold of the simple transcendentals. This
distinction comes to light, not in the visible shape of the circle and
ellipse, but only through investigating the different characteristics of
the Riemann's surfaces that correspond to the transcendental functions
that generate them. As we will illustrate by animation, a manifold that
is capable of permitting doubly periodic action must be toroidal, as
distinguished from the spheroidal manifold capable of permitting simply
periodic action. The first insight can be gained by looking at doubly
periodic action from the standpoint of Riemann's sphere. In animated
figure 11 we saw a Riemann's sphere depicting a simply periodic
manifold. In the left panel both the white and green paths approach the
infinite from two orthogonal directions while in the right panel, the
white path becomes periodic while the green remains unperiodic. In
animated figure 17, depicting elliptical transcendentals, both the white
and the green paths become periodic in the right panel.

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-944
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure17-riemann62-1.gif"
height="240" width="360"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-944\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure17-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"240\" width=\"360\" />

Riemann showed that such doubly periodic action cannot occur in a
manifold with the same spherical characteristics as the manifold of the
simple transcendentals. In a simply periodic function, as we saw in the
case of the complex sine and complex exponential, there is only one set
of closed, periodic curves and these converge on two points (the poles
in the case of the complex exponential and 1 and -1 in the case of the
complex sine.) (See Figure 18).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-945
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure18-riemann62-1.gif"
height="523" width="500"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-945\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure18-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"523\" width=\"500\" />

But, in a doubly periodic function there are two orthogonal sets of
closed curves, and each set converges on a different pair of points. (In
the case of the lemniscate those points are (1, -1) and (i ,-i) (See
Figure 19).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-946
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure19-riemann62-1.gif"
height="523" width="500"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-946\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure19-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"523\" width=\"500\" />

Thus, a manifold that is capable of permitting doubly periodic action
must have four branch points and two branch cuts connecting each pair of
branch points. (See Figure 20).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-947
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure20-riemann62-1.gif"
height="516" width="500"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-947\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure20-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"516\" width=\"500\" />

From this it can be seen, as Riemann insisted, that a manifold with four
branch points {must} be of a fundamentally different nature than a
manifold of only two branch points. To begin to get a sense of why that
is the case, look at the animated figure 21.

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-948
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure21-riemann62-1.gif"
height="288" width="432"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-948\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure21-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"288\" width=\"432\" />

In the left panel we see the two distinct rotations of the elliptical
function and the on the right we see their corresponding periods. In the
animation, one period is bounded horizontally while the other is bounded
vertically. Thus, the manifold of a doubly-periodic elliptical
transcendental must be doubly self-bounded. A sphere, however, is not
doubly self-bounded. But, Archytas's torus is. (See Figure 22.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-949
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure22-riemann62-1.gif"
height="792" width="500"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-949\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure22-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"792\" width=\"500\" />

The further characteristics of such a doubly bounded manifold can be
intuitively grasped by animated figure 23.

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-950
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure23-riemann62-1.gif"
height="288" width="432"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-950\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure23-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"288\" width=\"432\" />

In the left panel we see lines moving in the vertical direction and in
the right panel we see that their images must veer towards the
horizontal as they approach the horizontal boundaries. Similarly, in
animated figure 24, the lines moving in the horizontal direction in the
left panel, veer towards the vertical, in the right panel, as they
approach the vertical boundaries.

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-951
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure24-riemann62-1.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-951\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure24-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

This effect produces four points of convergence, one at each corner of
the square. These points of convergence are the "poles" of the manifold.
Thus, a doubly-periodic elliptical manifold must be a manifold with four
poles. Animated figure 25 shows the futility of attempting to represent
such a manifold by spherical geometry.

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-952
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure25-riemann62-1.gif"
height="288" width="432"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-952\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure25-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"288\" width=\"432\" />

As Riemann emphasized, a manifold with four such poles is fundamentally
different topologically than a sphere. The investigation of this
characteristic, Riemann identified, belongs to the domain of Leibniz's
"Analysis Situs", which seeks to discover the fundamental
characteristics that are intrinsic to a manifold. Under this way of
thinking, we can see, as Riemann did, that the capacity to sustain a
certain density of singularities is just such an intrinsic
characteristic. This capacity is determined by the number of principles
acting in the manifold. Applying Dirichlet's Principle, Riemann
demonstrated that this characteristic the power of the manifold to
sustain singularities-- determines all possibility for action within the
manifold. An increase in power must correspond to a change in these
topological characteristics. Such a change cannot come from within the
manifold itself, but only by the addition of a new principle, from
outside, {implying the necessary existence of a higher manifold}. This
change, from the spherical to the toroidal requires a change in our
depiction of the elliptical functions. In the following animations the
spherical action is depicted on the left and the toroidal action as
projected onto a plane on the right. Think of the square in the right
panel as an "unfolded" torus. In animated figure 26 we see how four
paths that approach the single pole of the sphere are mapped onto the
four distinct poles of the unfolded torus.

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-953
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure26-riemann62-1.gif"
height="288" width="432"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-953\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure26-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"288\" width=\"432\" />

In animated figure 27 we see how a circular path through the four branch
points maps to a square on the unfolded torus.

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-954
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure27-riemann62-1.gif"
height="288" width="432"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-954\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure27-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"288\" width=\"432\" />

In animated figure 28 we see how a circular path crossing all four
branch cuts maps onto the unfolded torus, as a curve with four distinct
discontinuities.

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-955
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure28-riemann62-1.gif"
height="288" width="432"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-955\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure28-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"288\" width=\"432\" />

Each time the path crosses a branch cut on the sphere, its image crosses
a discontinuity on the torus. This sets the stage for the discontinuous
jump into the next highest transcendental function the hyper-elliptical.
We will leave it to the next installment to more fully develop its
characteristic, but from animated figure 29 we can see that it has eight
branch points, eight branch cuts and eight poles.

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-956
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure29-riemann62-1.gif"
height="288" width="432"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-956\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure29-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"288\" width=\"432\" />

Gauss and Riemann both understood that a self-bounded manifold with this
capacity must be negatively curved and, in principle, cannot be
represented directly within the positive curvature of visible space.
Nevertheless, its shadow can be projected into the visible domain as
indicated by the negatively curved octagon in the animation. Thus, the
domain of Abelian transcendentals, as seen from Riemann's vantage point,
is a discontinuous manifold of continuous manifolds, each of which is
characterized by the capacity to sustain a greater number of
discontinuities. This {Discontinuum}, nevertheless, has a continuity,
intrinsic not to itself, but to the cognitive act from which it has been
conceived.
:::

::: {.addtoany_share_save_container .addtoany_content_bottom}
::: {.a2a_kit .a2a_kit_size_32 .addtoany_list a2a-url="http://lymcanada.org/62/" a2a-title="Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 62 :  On the Continuum of the Discontinuum"}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F62%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2062%20%3A%20%20On%20the%20Continuum%20of%20the%20Discontinuum "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F62%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2062%20%3A%20%20On%20the%20Continuum%20of%20the%20Discontinuum "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/google_plus?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F62%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2062%20%3A%20%20On%20the%20Continuum%20of%20the%20Discontinuum "Google+"){.a2a_button_google_plus}
[](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd .addtoany_share_save}
:::
:::
:::

[ [ Posted on ]{.screen-reader-text} [February 20, 2010 February 24,
2019](http://lymcanada.org/62/) ]{.posted-on} [ [ [ Author
]{.screen-reader-text} [Bruce
Director](http://lymcanada.org/author/bdirector/){.url .fn .n} ]{.author
.vcard} ]{.byline} [ [ Categories ]{.screen-reader-text}
[EN](http://lymcanada.org/category/en/) , [Riemmann for
Anti-Dummies](http://lymcanada.org/category/science-1/c132-riemmann-for-anti-dummies/)
]{.cat-links}

::: post-thumbnail
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.attachment-post-thumbnail
.size-post-thumbnail .wp-post-image width="500" height="83"
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure01-riemann62.gif"}

\<img width=\"500\" height=\"83\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure01-riemann62.gif\"
class=\"attachment-post-thumbnail size-post-thumbnail wp-post-image\"
alt=\"\" />
:::

::: entry-header
# Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 62 : On the Continuum of the Discontinuum {#riemann-for-anti-dummies-part-62-on-the-continuum-of-the-discontinuum-1 .entry-title}
:::

::: entry-content
::: pf-content
## On the Continuum of the Discontinuum {#on-the-continuum-of-the-discontinuum-1 align="justify"}

by Bruce Director

In the Laws, Plato's Athenian stranger laments that the Greek people's
pervasive ignorance of the incommensurability of a line with a surface
and a surface with a solid, had rendered them more like "guzzling swine"
than true human beings. While the same lament can be sounded with
respect to today's society, modern citizens must also include an
understanding of those higher transcendentals which are the subject of
Riemann's "Theory of Abelian Functions", if they are to avoid the
lamentable fate of Plato's fellow Greeks. To rectify this condition,
Plato recommended that these subjects should be learned in childhood,
through play. [ ]{#more-957} Yet those who, today, have already
graduated from that stage in life should, nevertheless, not despair. For
them such knowledge can still be assimilated through that form of fun
that has come to be known as pedagogical exercises, provided that one
approaches this play with the zeal and eagerness of youth. What Plato
considered most important to glean from this play is not the facts (such
as, that an area can not be measured by a line, or that a volume can not
be measured by an area), but the cognitive experience of discovering the
underlying principle implied by the incommensurability of these three
different types of action. Through this experience the mind recognizes
its power to recognize what Plato called "powers", so that when
confronted with "facts", it recognizes, as Riemann did, that all facts
are hypotheses, and it is attracted not to the factual statements by
themselves, but to the underlying principles on which the hypotheses,
implied by the existence of such facts, are based. These principles,
thus recognized as thought-objects, become a proper, and necessary,
subject for further investigation. From investigations typified by the
discovery of the incommensurability of the line, square and cube, we
learn of the relationship between objects of sense and the underlying
principles that govern their characteristics. For the relationships
among principles and those relationships to the mind, we must turn to
the subject of Riemann's "Theory of Abelian Functions". From that
standpoint, let us continue our pedagogical investigation of Riemann's
work.

Discreteness and Continuity

While the principles for the first type of investigation were well
established by the Pythagorean science of Sphaerics, to which Plato's
comments refer, their most general, modern elaboration was laid down by
Riemann in his 1854 habilitation dissertation. Generalizing the method
that had been developed by the successive accomplishments of Cusa,
Kepler, Leibniz and Gauss, Riemann set forth the fundamental basis by
which scientific investigations into the effect of physical principles
on the objects of sense must proceed--without the anti-scientific
presumption of the {a priori} axioms, postulates and definitions of
Euclidean geometry. Riemann rejected Kant's insistence that the
characteristics of Euclidean geometry were "hard- wired" into the human
mind. Instead of this Aristotelean dogma, Riemann recognized that the
mind understands physical processes by forming concepts of a
multiply-extended manifold whose characteristics are determined by
physical principles, or "modes of determination" (Bestimungsweissen)
that govern that action. These modes of determination can never be given
{a priori}, but must be discovered by the unique experiments that test
the underlying hypotheses on which the concept of the manifold is based.
Thus, the nature of the physical process can only be understood in
relation to the essential physical characteristics of the manifold. The
number of principles acting on the manifold (extension), and the metric
relations determined by those principles (curvature), are identified by
Riemann as such fundamental characteristics. In the {Theory of Abelian
Functions}, Riemann includes the density of singularities among the
essential characteristics. Again, these characteristics, cannot be given
{a priori}, but are determined by the physical characteristics of the
action under investigation. To illustrate this point, look at the
oft-cited example of the principle of least-action as expressed by light
undergoing reflection and refraction. In the former, the principle of
least- action is expressed by the invariant characteristic that the path
of light from the object, to the mirror, to the eye, is always the
shortest distance. Because this characteristic is reflected by the
equality of the angle of incidence and the angle of reflection, this
least-action effect can be completely measured simply by one mode of
determination, specifically the angle of incidence. Thus, the
experimental investigation of reflected light can be grasped by the mind
through a concept of a simply-extended manifold. However, under
refraction, this same principle of least-action is expressed not by the
path of shortest distance, but by the path of shortest time, which can
only be completely measured by the angle of incidence, {and} the index
of refraction (the difference in the effect of the density of the two
media on the velocity of light). Consequently, two modes of
determination are necessary to determine position with respect to
refraction, and thus, comprehending refraction, requires the formation
of a concept of a doubly-extended manifold. Riemann makes a further
distinction between manifolds: "According as there is, or is not, a
continuous transition from one to another, they form a continuous or
discrete manifold; the individual modes are called, in the first case,
points, in the latter case, elements of the manifold." The objects of
sense comprise, as Riemann noted, a discrete manifold, in which the
"principle of metric relations is implicit in the notion of the
manifold" and, "comparison as to quantity occurs by counting". The
objects of such a discrete manifold are distinguished from one another
by their differing physical characteristics. Thus, they are not counted
with respect to {a priori} considerations, but only with respect to the
characteristic modes of determination of the manifold under which they
are being investigated. For example, it would not be possible to count
the number of persons in a room by counting the living creatures in that
room with four legs. (Unless, of course, the room included Nobel prize
winning economists, or officials of the Bush Administration.) But, as
Cusa and Kepler had insisted, and as Leibniz expressed it through his
calculus, universal physical principles are acting continuously, albeit
differentially, on the objects of sense from outside the domain of sense
perception. Consequently, Riemann insisted, to comprehend the principles
governing the objects of sense, we must seek the metric relationships
outside the visible domain "in the colligating forces that operate upon
it." Thus, for the investigation of the effect of {continuously acting
physical principles} on discrete physical objects, we must form concepts
of a multiply-extended continuous manifold. Riemann notes that common
experience affords only a few examples of such multiply-extended
continuous manifolds (the manifold of positions of objects in space and
the manifold of all colors are the two examples cited by Riemann).
Nevertheless, concepts of such manifolds arise when investigating
physical processes that are governed by the colligating action of
multiple principles. The geometrical expression for such manifolds can
be formed in the complex domain, in the context of the investigation of
those higher transcendentals known as "Abelian functions". A simple
illustration of the principle of the latter (which is relevant for what
follows), can be accomplished by rethinking one's naive concept of
circular action. From the naive standpoint, the circle seems to be a
simple closed curve. But what makes possible this simple circular curve?
From the standpoint of Gauss and Riemann, this simple circular curve is
the visible effect of the connected interaction of two continuously
changing transcendental functions the sine and the cosine. Formal
geometricians will find this way of thinking very uncomfortable, because
from the formal standpoint, the circle seems simple and the circular
functions seem complex. But, as Gauss demonstrated with his first
discovery concerning the division of the circle, it is only from the
standpoint of this inversion, that even the most simple propositions
concerning the circle (such as the construction of the regular polygons)
can be determined. Another heuristic for the same idea, is the case of
the Leibniz-Bernoulli successful determination of the catenary, in
contrast to Galileo's impotent pretension. Whereas Galileo fixated on
attempting to describe the visible shape of the chain, Leibniz and
Bernoulli investigated the continuously acting principles that
determined that shape from outside the visible domain. This Leibniz
-Bernoulli collaboration proved that the visible shape of the catenary
was the effect of the connected interaction between the continuously
changing effects of gravity and tension, the which could be measured as
the arithmetic mean between two contrariwise (transcendental)
exponential curves. In both these cases, the visible curves (circle and
catenary) are understood as the physical effect of two, distinct but
connected, modes of determination whose concept forms a doubly- extended
manifold. Anther example of the method by which we investigate this
relationship between continuous manifolds and their effects on the
discrete objects of sense is investigated, was given by Gauss in his
1832 investigation of magnetism: "To explain magnetic phenomena, we
assume two magnetic fluxes: one we call north, the other south. We
presuppose, that the elements of the one flux attract those of the
other, and that on the other hand, two elements of the same flux
mutually repel each other, and that each of hte two effects alters in
inverse relation to the square of the distance. It will be shown below
that the correctness of this law was itself confirmed by our
observations. "These fluxes do not occur independently, but only in
association with the ponderable particles of such bodies which take on
magnetism, and their effects express themselves either when they put the
bodies into motion or they prevent or transform the motion, which other
forces acting on these bodies, e.g. the force of gravity, would elicit.
"Hence the effect of a given amount of magnetic flux on a given amount
of either the same or the opposite flux at a given distance is
comparable to a given motive force, i.e. with the effect of a given
accelerating force on a given mass, and since the magnetic fluxes
themselves can be known only through the effects, which they bring
forth, the latter must directly serve to measure the former."

A Higher Continuity

But there is a still deeper expression of this relationship between
discrete and continuous manifolds that will take us directly to the
subject of Riemann's investigation of Abelian functions. This can be
preliminarily illustrated by illuminating the above referenced
investigation of Plato with light from Gauss' and Riemann's complex
domain. If we think of the line, surface and volume as paradigmatic of,
respectively, simply, doubly and triply extended continuous manifolds,
the following paradox emerges: within each manifold there is a clear
continuity of action, yet there is no continuous transition from one to
the other. For example, while a point can move continuously within a
line, once the line itself is moved, it forms a surface. The transition
from line to surface is discontinuous. There is no in- between state
where the mainfold is part line and part surface. It is either all one
or all the other. Similarly, there can be continuous motion within a
surface, but once the surface itself is moved, it suddenly becomes a
volume. Further as Plato emphasizes, the metric relations of the line
square and cube are incommensurable with each other. For example, the
metric relations of a line are inadequate to measure a square.
Consequently, a line adequate to measure a square, must be produced from
a square, not a line. In other words, the metric relations for such a
line must be sought outside the line-- in a the manifold of squares, in
which lines exist only as sides of squares. Such apparent
discontinuities , among continuities, point us toward a higher
continuity, which is continuously acting, as a manifold of manifolds, in
which these discontinuities exist simultaneously. This simultaneous
continuity is not located in the manifolds themselves but in the
cognitive effect of the transition from one manifold to another. Take a
close look at this paradox from the standpoint of the method of Archytas
for doubling the cube, in which the line, area and volume are thought of
as the principles that produce, respectively, zero, one and two
geometric means between two extremes.

Animated figure 1 depicts the continuous motion of a point (Q) within a
simply extended manifold (line).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-927
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure01-riemann62-1.gif"
height="83" width="500"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-927\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure01-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"83\" width=\"500\" />

Animated figure 2 depicts that same continuous motion of (Q) but now it
is occurring in a doubly-extended manifold, and is connected to the
circular motion of (P).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-928
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure02-riemann62-1.gif"
height="304" width="500"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-928\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure02-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"304\" width=\"500\" />

In animated figure 3, this connected motion of figure 2 is now occurring
in a triply-extended manifold, as the connected action of (P) and (Q) is
now rotated within a toroidal surface.

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-929
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure03-riemann62-1.gif"
height="370" width="360"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-929\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure03-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"370\" width=\"360\" />

In each case, the motion of (Q) is simply in one direction along a line,
but the manifold in which that simple motion occurs increases,
discontinuously, from "n" to "n+1" with the addition of each new degree
of action. This effect of the addition of each new degree of action is
reflected on the characteristics of the motion of (Q). In figure 1 the
motion of (Q) along line AO is uniform. But when (Q) is connected to a
line perpendicular to AO, whose opposite endpoint (P) is moving
uniformly on a circle, (Q)'s motion along AO becomes non-uniform.
Further, when line AO is rotated uniformly about (O), (P)'s motion along
the circle becomes non-uniform and the non-uniform motion of (Q) along
AO is changed again. The addition of each new degree of action can be
measured as a change in the rate of motion of (Q) along line AO . But
while the path of (Q) is always linear, its motion becomes increasingly
non-linear. Further, in each case, the metric of Q's motion along line
AO cannot be found with respect to Q's position within line AO, but must
be sought outside line AO, in the relationship of AO to the circle and
the torus, respectively. The motion of (Q) is always continuous, and,
the effect of (P) on (Q)'s motion is continuous, and the effect of (A)'s
motion on (Q) is continuous. But the transitions of the manifold from
when (Q)'s motion is being determined by (Q) alone, to being determined
by the effect of (P), to being determined by the connected effect of (A)
and (P), are discontinuous. Yet as Archytas's construction implies,
there exists a higher, cognitive continuity, that unifies, as if from
outside, the discontinuities among these three manifolds of action. A
similar point can be made from the standpoint of Gauss's geometrical
proof of the fundamental theorem of algebra. From the perspective of
formal algebra, the terms of an equation such as x\^2+x+1=0 are
distinguished from one another simply by how many times "x" is
multiplied by itself. (2 for the first term, 1 for the second and 0 for
the third.) But from the standpoint of physical geometry, the highest
term indicates a degree of extension that determines the governing
characteristics of the entire function. In other words, in the above
example, we are not adding a square to a line to a point. Rather, the
"x\^2" is an area (x by x) and so is the "x" (x by 1)and so is the "1"
(1by 1). But if those same terms are subsumed into a cubic equation,
x\^3+x\^2+x+1=0, they are all transformed into volumes. (For example,
the "x\^2" in the cubic equation is no longer an x by x area, but is
transformed into a x by x by 1 volume.) In his proof of the fundamental
theorem of algebra, Gauss created a higher geometry that expressed the
continuity within any single algebraic power with respect to that
power's discontinuous relationship to all other algebraic powers. Thus,
Gauss's higher geometry expresses the discontinuities between the
algebraic powers, {cognitively} as an effect of a simultaneous
continuity. What Gauss accomplished with his studies of algebraic
powers, Riemann achieved for that succession of transcendental species
of powers, known as "Abelian functions".

The Circle in the Complex Domain

Before turning directly to Riemann's accomplishment, let us secure our
footing by looking at Gauss's earliest discovery the division of the
circle, from the vantage point of Riemann's work. As was already known
to the Pythagorean geometers, the principle on which the division of the
circle into equal parts depends, can not be found in the circle itself.
As Kepler summarizes this knowledge in the first book of the Harmony of
the World, the division of the circle into equal parts by magnitudes
that are constructable (knowable) from the circle and its diameter is
limited--a characteristic that from the Pythagoreans onward was
recognized as the futility of achieving any universal knowledge from the
so-called straight-edge and compass constructions. Though this
limitation was recognized from the Pythagoreans through Kepler, it was
not until Gauss looked at the matter from the standpoint of the complex
domain, that the{ principle} on which this limitation is based was
known. Since we have treated Gauss's discovery of the division of the
circle in previous installments of this series and in numerous oral
presentations, we focus here only on the general considerations. First
we must extricate our mind from its attachment to the idea that a circle
is a self- evident object in visible space, which we divide into "n"
visible pieces to form an "n" sided polygon. Instead, think of a circle
divided into "n" distinct parts as the result of a single generating
principle in which the "n" parts are intrinsic to manifold. This can be
done when the circle is considered to be a special type of pathway in a
manifold of action in which the pathways of least action are always
logarithmic spirals. Such a manifold can be expressed by the complex
exponential (See Figure 4.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-930
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure04-riemann62-1.gif"
height="500" width="500"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-930\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure04-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"500\" width=\"500\" />

While there is an unlimited possibility for variation among these
logarithmic spirals, depending on the rate of growth of the spiral, such
unlimited possibility is {not} unbounded. The minimum-maximum
relationship bounding this manifold is expressed by the spirals with
maximum rotation and minimum extension, which are called "circles" and
the spirals of maximum extension and minimum rotation, which are called,
"straight lines". The metric relation intrinsic to this
"exponential-logarithmic" manifold can be expressed by the relationship
between how a change in position along a spiral pathway is measured by
an angle and how that same change in position is measured by a change in
the length of the corresponding arc or radial line. (Note that the arc
and radial line are both spiral pathways.) (See figure 5).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-931
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure05-riemann62-1.gif"
height="318" width="465"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-931\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure05-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"318\" width=\"465\" />

This relationship is that equal angles correspond to exponential changes
in arc length. Thus, an increase of the angle by "n" increases the
corresponding arc length by the "nth" power. (For example, a change in
position measured by a doubling of an angle corresponds to squaring of
the arc length along the spiral path.) (See Figure 6)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-932
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure06-riemann62-1.gif"
height="318" width="465"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-932\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure06-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"318\" width=\"465\" />

However, for that special type of logarithmic spiral known as a circle,
the equal angles correspond to equal arcs. But the intrinsic logarithmic
characteristic of the spiral is, nevertheless, embedded in the circle as
well and it is expressed in the relationship of the angle to the sine
and the cosine, when that relationship is expressed in the complex
domain. (See Figure 7).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-933
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure07-riemann62-1.gif"
height="525" width="500"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-933\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure07-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"525\" width=\"500\" />

Thus, dividing a circle into "n" parts corresponds to finding "n" powers
within an angle of 360 degrees. This principle can be expressed by the
simple algebraic expression, "x\^n-1=0". This can be grasped intuitively
by looking at animated figure 8 which depicts the complex cubing
function. In the animation, the cubing function triples the angles swept
out in the left panel, the effect of which is depicted in the right
panel.

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-934
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure08-riemann62-1.gif"
height="200" width="300"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-934\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure08-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"200\" width=\"300\" />

Thus, the vertices of a regular triangle are the points of discontinuity
where the action on the left sweeps out one complete circle on the
right. This is depicted in the animation by a change of color. For what
follows it is useful to also look at this same action by inversion as
depicted in animated figure 9.

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-935
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure09-riemann62-1.gif"
height="200" width="300"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-935\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure09-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"200\" width=\"300\" />

Here we see the black circle on the right, simultaneously, sweeping out
three unique circular segments on the left. Seen in this way, the
vertices of an "n" sided polygon can be understood as "n"
discontinuities produced by the continuous action of an algebraic
function of the "nth" power. This gives rise to a new form of the same
paradox cited above with respect to Plato's investigation of the
incommensurability of the line, square and cube. In the complex domain,
an "nth" power algebraic function produces, by a continuous process,"n"
discontinuities, but it can never produce "n+1" such discontinuities.
The transition from "n" to "n+1" is itself discontinuous, but it
signifies a higher type of discontinuity, than that expressed by the
vertices of a regular polygon. Further, though each lower power
signifies a manifold containing "n" discontinuities, the succession of
higher discontinuities in the transitions from "n" to "n+1" to "n+2",
etc. , when considered simultaneously, imply a cognitively generated
new, higher, type of continuity. Now, look at this paradox further from
the standpoint of Cusa's determination of the transcendental nature of
the circle. If an "n" sided polygon is produced by an algebraic function
of the "nth" power, the power of the function that produces the circle
must be infinite, and therefore, outside the domain of algebra. It
exists in the domain that Leibniz called transcendental, which subsumes
all possible algebraic relationships. Thus, the transcendental power
that generates the circle, generates, simultaneously, the discontinuous
manifold of all possible regular polygons.

A Higher Discontinuity

While the discontinuous manifold of the algebraic powers is bounded by
the simple transcendental power that generates the circle, our
investigations of the physical universe demand that we find conceptions
of manifolds of still greater power. The path on which to look for such
conceptions was discovered by Gauss, Abel, Dirichlet and Jacobi, but its
illumination we owe to Riemann. That path is not free of obstacles. In
fact, it is the obstacles we seek and with Riemann's beacon we can find
them. The first obstacle we seek is that which bounds the simple
transcendental power that generates the circle. But to find it in the
visible circle itself would be futile, as the visible circle appears to
be obviously unbounded. Nevertheless, that boundary, of the domain of
simple transcendentals, emerges clearly when we look, with the aid of
Riemann's surfaces, at the circle as an inversion from the circular
functions. As was illustrated in the last installment of this series,
the essential characteristic of the simple transcendental functions is
that they are simply-periodic. This characteristic is evident from the
visible expression of the circular functions, for as the sine goes from
0 to 1 to 0 to -1, the angle rotates counterclockwise around a circle.
Thus, while the circular angle has an unbounded potential, the circular
sine is always bounded between 1 and -1. An insight into the importance
of this can be gleaned from posing this relationship as an inversion.
The question, "what is the sine of an angle?" has only one answer, but
the question, "what is the arc that has this sine?" has an unlimited
number of answers. The crucial implications of this simply-periodic
characteristic can be most easily seen by, as we did above, looking
first at the complex circular functions from the more general
expression, the complex exponential, which, as we saw, is a manifold of
action in which the least-action pathways are logarithmic spirals. It is
evident from the intrinsic geometry of the spiral, especially when
viewed from the standpoint of the Riemann sphere, that this manifold has
two singularities, which on the Riemann sphere are the north and south
pole. (See figure 10.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-936
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure10-riemann62-1.gif"
height="516" width="500"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-936\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure10-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"516\" width=\"500\" />

In this manifold, circles, are simply those spirals that rotate around
the poles but do not extend to them. "Straight" lines are simply the
spirals that extend to the poles but do not rotate. Like all the other
spirals in this manifold, these limiting cases are also bounded by the
poles. Riemann recognized that a manifold with two singularities was
intrinsic to the characteristics of spherical geometry. Consequently, he
defined spherical geometry as the geometry of manifolds of two
singularities. However, as was also illustrated in the last installment,
the singularities exemplified by the poles of the complex exponential in
a Riemann's surface, are a special type of singularity, which Riemann
called, "branch points." This is due to the fact that since the complex
exponential is periodic in one direction (the "latitudinal" direction),
each rotation must add another layer, or, "branch" to the manifold. (See
figure 11).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-937
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure11-riemann62-1.gif"
height="288" width="432"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-937\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure11-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"288\" width=\"432\" />

Thus, the Riemann surface that depicts the manifold of the complex
exponential is a sphere with an unlimited number of layers, joined at
the north and south pole. A "branch cut" is made from one pole to the
other. Any action that crosses this cut, crosses onto the next layer.
Consequently, action in the "latitudinal" direction, necessarily crosses
the branch cut, while action in the "longitudinal" direction necessarily
does not. From this perspective we can now understand the circular
functions as a complex exponential whose branch points have been rotated
from the poles, to the points representing 1 and -1 on the equator. (The
hyperbolic functions are simply the simple transcendentals with branch
points at i and -i, thus completing the simple transcendental domain.)
The branch cut now extends from these points on the equator to the north
pole. (See Figure 12).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-938
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure12-riemann62-1.gif"
height="516" width="500"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-938\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure12-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"516\" width=\"500\" />

Just like the complex exponential, any action that crosses this branch
cut, crosses over onto another layer of the Riemann's surface. A further
insight into this characteristic is gained by looking more closely into
the Riemann's surfaces for the circular functions. In animated figure 13
the left panel shows a rotation going from -90 degrees to 90 degrees
while the right panel shows the sine going from -1 to 1.

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-939
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure13-riemann62-1.gif"
height="288" width="432"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-939\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure13-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"288\" width=\"432\" />

In animated figure 14 this rotation is continued, but as it starts back
toward the beginning it crosses the branch cut. This produces a
corresponding discontinuous jump in the sine as it moves back from 1 to
-1.

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-940
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure14-riemann62-1.gif"
height="288" width="432"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-940\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure14-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"288\" width=\"432\" />

However action in an orthogonal direction does not cross the branch cut
and is consequently, unbounded. (See animated figure 15).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-941
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure15-riemann62-1.gif"
height="288" width="432"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-941\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure15-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"288\" width=\"432\" />

This difference can be seen more completely when viewed from the
standpoint of the Riemann sphere. (See animated figures 16).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-942
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure16a-riemann62-1.gif"
height="288" width="432"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-942\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure16a-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"288\" width=\"432\" />
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-943
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure16b-riemann62-1.gif"
height="288" width="432"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-943\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure16b-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"288\" width=\"432\" />

Armed with this Riemannian view of simple transcendentals we can see
that the essential characteristics of simply periodic manifolds are
expressed by the intrinsic existence of two branch points. Such
manifolds arise from the investigation of physical processes which can
be understood as the effect of the transcendental action of only one
principle. For example, in simple uniform circular motion, the sine is
transcendental with the arc, but the arc is uniform with the angle. Or,
in the case of the catenary, the gravitational effect varies but the
tension is always constant. However, as the "Kepler Problem"
illustrates, in non-uniform physical motion, two or more transcendental
principles are acting, connectedly and simultaneously, to produce the
perceived physical effect. For example, in the case of elliptical
action, the sine is incommensurable with the arc, but the arc is also
incommensurable, according to a different principle, with the angle. (A
similar type of double incommensurability arises when expressing the
relationship of the varying period of a circular pendulum the angle
formed by the string and the vertical.) Gauss, Abel and Jacobi all
recognized that these types of physical action could only be expressed
by a higher type of transcendental a transcendental function that had
the power to unify two connected but distinct transcendental actions.
However, a clear and elementary understanding of these transcendentals
is only possible from the vantage point of Riemann's surfaces. To
intuitively grasp the concept of these higher transcendentals, let us
investigate how the elliptical transcendentals are distinguished from
simple transcendentals by the characteristics of their corresponding
Riemann's surface. As Gauss demonstrated for the case of the lemniscate,
the characteristic of the elliptical transcendentals are distinguished
by their double periodicity. Riemann showed that this characteristic of
double periodicity implied a distinctly different manifold of action
than the spherical manifold of the simple transcendentals. This
distinction comes to light, not in the visible shape of the circle and
ellipse, but only through investigating the different characteristics of
the Riemann's surfaces that correspond to the transcendental functions
that generate them. As we will illustrate by animation, a manifold that
is capable of permitting doubly periodic action must be toroidal, as
distinguished from the spheroidal manifold capable of permitting simply
periodic action. The first insight can be gained by looking at doubly
periodic action from the standpoint of Riemann's sphere. In animated
figure 11 we saw a Riemann's sphere depicting a simply periodic
manifold. In the left panel both the white and green paths approach the
infinite from two orthogonal directions while in the right panel, the
white path becomes periodic while the green remains unperiodic. In
animated figure 17, depicting elliptical transcendentals, both the white
and the green paths become periodic in the right panel.

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-944
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure17-riemann62-1.gif"
height="240" width="360"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-944\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure17-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"240\" width=\"360\" />

Riemann showed that such doubly periodic action cannot occur in a
manifold with the same spherical characteristics as the manifold of the
simple transcendentals. In a simply periodic function, as we saw in the
case of the complex sine and complex exponential, there is only one set
of closed, periodic curves and these converge on two points (the poles
in the case of the complex exponential and 1 and -1 in the case of the
complex sine.) (See Figure 18).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-945
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure18-riemann62-1.gif"
height="523" width="500"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-945\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure18-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"523\" width=\"500\" />

But, in a doubly periodic function there are two orthogonal sets of
closed curves, and each set converges on a different pair of points. (In
the case of the lemniscate those points are (1, -1) and (i ,-i) (See
Figure 19).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-946
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure19-riemann62-1.gif"
height="523" width="500"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-946\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure19-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"523\" width=\"500\" />

Thus, a manifold that is capable of permitting doubly periodic action
must have four branch points and two branch cuts connecting each pair of
branch points. (See Figure 20).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-947
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure20-riemann62-1.gif"
height="516" width="500"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-947\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure20-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"516\" width=\"500\" />

From this it can be seen, as Riemann insisted, that a manifold with four
branch points {must} be of a fundamentally different nature than a
manifold of only two branch points. To begin to get a sense of why that
is the case, look at the animated figure 21.

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-948
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure21-riemann62-1.gif"
height="288" width="432"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-948\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure21-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"288\" width=\"432\" />

In the left panel we see the two distinct rotations of the elliptical
function and the on the right we see their corresponding periods. In the
animation, one period is bounded horizontally while the other is bounded
vertically. Thus, the manifold of a doubly-periodic elliptical
transcendental must be doubly self-bounded. A sphere, however, is not
doubly self-bounded. But, Archytas's torus is. (See Figure 22.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-949
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure22-riemann62-1.gif"
height="792" width="500"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-949\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure22-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"792\" width=\"500\" />

The further characteristics of such a doubly bounded manifold can be
intuitively grasped by animated figure 23.

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-950
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure23-riemann62-1.gif"
height="288" width="432"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-950\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure23-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"288\" width=\"432\" />

In the left panel we see lines moving in the vertical direction and in
the right panel we see that their images must veer towards the
horizontal as they approach the horizontal boundaries. Similarly, in
animated figure 24, the lines moving in the horizontal direction in the
left panel, veer towards the vertical, in the right panel, as they
approach the vertical boundaries.

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-951
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure24-riemann62-1.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-951\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure24-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

This effect produces four points of convergence, one at each corner of
the square. These points of convergence are the "poles" of the manifold.
Thus, a doubly-periodic elliptical manifold must be a manifold with four
poles. Animated figure 25 shows the futility of attempting to represent
such a manifold by spherical geometry.

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-952
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure25-riemann62-1.gif"
height="288" width="432"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-952\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure25-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"288\" width=\"432\" />

As Riemann emphasized, a manifold with four such poles is fundamentally
different topologically than a sphere. The investigation of this
characteristic, Riemann identified, belongs to the domain of Leibniz's
"Analysis Situs", which seeks to discover the fundamental
characteristics that are intrinsic to a manifold. Under this way of
thinking, we can see, as Riemann did, that the capacity to sustain a
certain density of singularities is just such an intrinsic
characteristic. This capacity is determined by the number of principles
acting in the manifold. Applying Dirichlet's Principle, Riemann
demonstrated that this characteristic the power of the manifold to
sustain singularities-- determines all possibility for action within the
manifold. An increase in power must correspond to a change in these
topological characteristics. Such a change cannot come from within the
manifold itself, but only by the addition of a new principle, from
outside, {implying the necessary existence of a higher manifold}. This
change, from the spherical to the toroidal requires a change in our
depiction of the elliptical functions. In the following animations the
spherical action is depicted on the left and the toroidal action as
projected onto a plane on the right. Think of the square in the right
panel as an "unfolded" torus. In animated figure 26 we see how four
paths that approach the single pole of the sphere are mapped onto the
four distinct poles of the unfolded torus.

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-953
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure26-riemann62-1.gif"
height="288" width="432"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-953\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure26-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"288\" width=\"432\" />

In animated figure 27 we see how a circular path through the four branch
points maps to a square on the unfolded torus.

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-954
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure27-riemann62-1.gif"
height="288" width="432"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-954\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure27-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"288\" width=\"432\" />

In animated figure 28 we see how a circular path crossing all four
branch cuts maps onto the unfolded torus, as a curve with four distinct
discontinuities.

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-955
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure28-riemann62-1.gif"
height="288" width="432"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-955\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure28-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"288\" width=\"432\" />

Each time the path crosses a branch cut on the sphere, its image crosses
a discontinuity on the torus. This sets the stage for the discontinuous
jump into the next highest transcendental function the hyper-elliptical.
We will leave it to the next installment to more fully develop its
characteristic, but from animated figure 29 we can see that it has eight
branch points, eight branch cuts and eight poles.

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.size-full
.wp-image-956
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure29-riemann62-1.gif"
height="288" width="432"} \<img class=\" size-full wp-image-956\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part62_files_figure29-riemann62-1.gif\"
height=\"288\" width=\"432\" />

Gauss and Riemann both understood that a self-bounded manifold with this
capacity must be negatively curved and, in principle, cannot be
represented directly within the positive curvature of visible space.
Nevertheless, its shadow can be projected into the visible domain as
indicated by the negatively curved octagon in the animation. Thus, the
domain of Abelian transcendentals, as seen from Riemann's vantage point,
is a discontinuous manifold of continuous manifolds, each of which is
characterized by the capacity to sustain a greater number of
discontinuities. This {Discontinuum}, nevertheless, has a continuity,
intrinsic not to itself, but to the cognitive act from which it has been
conceived.
:::

::: {.addtoany_share_save_container .addtoany_content_bottom}
::: {.a2a_kit .a2a_kit_size_32 .addtoany_list a2a-url="http://lymcanada.org/62/" a2a-title="Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 62 :  On the Continuum of the Discontinuum"}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F62%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2062%20%3A%20%20On%20the%20Continuum%20of%20the%20Discontinuum "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F62%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2062%20%3A%20%20On%20the%20Continuum%20of%20the%20Discontinuum "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/google_plus?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F62%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2062%20%3A%20%20On%20the%20Continuum%20of%20the%20Discontinuum "Google+"){.a2a_button_google_plus}
[](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd .addtoany_share_save}
:::
:::
:::

[ [ Posted on ]{.screen-reader-text} [February 20, 2010 February 24,
2019](http://lymcanada.org/62/) ]{.posted-on} [ [ [ Author
]{.screen-reader-text} [Bruce
Director](http://lymcanada.org/author/bdirector/){.url .fn .n} ]{.author
.vcard} ]{.byline} [ [ Categories ]{.screen-reader-text}
[EN](http://lymcanada.org/category/en/) , [Riemmann for
Anti-Dummies](http://lymcanada.org/category/science-1/c132-riemmann-for-anti-dummies/)
]{.cat-links}
