::: entry-header
# Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 64 : Hypergeometric Harmonics {#riemann-for-anti-dummies-part-64-hypergeometric-harmonics .entry-title}
:::

::: entry-content
::: pf-content
## Hypergeometric Harmonics

by Bruce Director

In the same year that Riemann published his {Theory of Abelian
Functions}, he also produced a companion piece of equal significance
titled {Contributions to the Theory of Functions representable by
Gauss's Series F(a,b,c,x). The content of these works was the polished
product of material Riemann developed in a series of lectures delivered
at Goettingen University during the 1855-56 interval and through earlier
discussions with Gauss and Dirichlet. [ ]{#more-968} When taken together
with his 1854 Habilitation dissertation, these works developed the
crucial discoveries that established the epistemological basis for the
future development of science. Like all such fundamental discoveries, it
has a history, that begins with the Pythagorean development of the
Egyptian science of "sphaerics" , weaves its way through the Renaissance
achievements of Cusa, Leonardo and Pacioli, and emerges in the work of
Kepler, Fermat and Leibniz. Also, as with all creative discoveries,
Riemann's method is antagonistic to the sophistries of the Eleatics,
Aristotle, the empiricism of Sarpi, Descartes and Newton, and the
formalism of Kaestner's and Gauss's adversaries, Euler, Lagrange and
D'Alembert. As such, the study of Riemann's treatment of what was
otherwise known as the "hypergeometric function", provides us an
opportunity to investigate a subject of universal import, whose
significance extends far beyond its specific expression in the domain of
physical science.\
Therefore, to understand Riemann's discovery, it is necessary to lay an
adequate foundation by situating these concepts with respect to the
history of ideas. This can be done pedagogically by pivoting our
discussion on Kepler's amplification of the Pythagorean/Platonic concept
of harmonics into modern astro and micro physical investigations. But
before turning to Kepler, it would be useful to summarily identify some
specifics of the matter as it would have presented itself to Gauss and
Riemann, because the general level of scientific illiteracy today is so
high that only a few are able to recognize what would have been standard
knowledge among Gauss's and Riemann's qualified contemporaries.

Calculating is Not Knowing

The series that Riemann referred to as "Gauss's series", is formally
represented as an infinite series of the following form:

1+ ((ab)\*x)/(1\*c) + (a(a+1)b(b+1)\*x\^2)/(1\*2\*c(c+1))) +
(a(a+1)(a+2)b(b+1)(b+2)\*x\^3)/(1\*2\*3\*c(c+1)(c+2)....

It had been studied previously by Euler, who believed it to be a type of
magic potion, which, if the right values for a, b, c and x were chosen,
could be transformed into an infinite series that Euler could use to
approximate the numerical values of algebraic, circular and logarithmic
functions. For example, F(1, 1, 1, x) forms the geometric series
1+x+x\^2+x\^3....; t\^nF(-n, d, d,-u/t) forms an infinite series that,
algebraically, converges on (t+u)\^n; xF(½, ½, 3/2, x\^2) forms an
infinite series that, algebraically, converges on the arcsine of x ;
tF(1,1,2,-u/t) converges on the natural logarithm of (1+t). And there
are many other cases of algebraic and transcendental relationships that
can be given a formal expression by this series. Euler alleged that if a
formal, deductive relationship could be presented between an infinite
series and a function on which it apparently converged, the two should
be considered equivalent expressions of the same idea.\
But Euler was deliberately obfuscating the epistemological questions
underlying infinite series that had been definitively settled by
Nicholas of Cusa in his sermons on the quadrature of the circle. As is
evident from Cusa's constructions, the circle could never be defined as
the limit of the infinite process of dividing the sides of a polygon,
because no such repetitive process could ever produce a circle. On the
other hand, a circle could produce a succession of polygons with an
increasing number of sides. Consequently, Cusa insisted, the circle was
generated by an entirely different power, one which Leibniz would later
call "transcendental", as distinguished from the lower, "algebraic"
domain of the polygons. It was this transcendental nature of the circle,
Cusa emphasized, from which the polygons obtained their characteristics,
not the other way around.\
The ontological implications of Cusa's discovery re-emerged in
connection with Kepler's effort to determine the nature of the
non-uniform physical action of the elliptical planetary orbits. As
Kepler emphasized in his {New Astronomy}, the position and time of a
planet could be calculated to any degree of accuracy he desired, but he
could not give them an exact numerical value because their relationship
depended on both the angle and its sine, whose proportions are
incommensurable with each other, and as such, cannot be expressed by a
finite arithmetical relationship. Kepler, recognizing that the presence
of such an incommensurability signified the existence of an underlying,
yet to be discovered principle, called for a new mathematics--which
emerged as Leibniz's calculus and the development of elliptical
functions by Gauss, Abel, Jacobi and Riemann. Kepler's call did not
arise from a concern for a more accurate means to calculate the
numerical values. He had already devised sufficient methods to achieve
the highest degree of arithmetical accuracy possible. His concern was to
express a more exact knowledge of the {principle} on which the planet's
motion was based, and the non-uniform changing effect of that principle
on the planet.\
Leibniz, through his investigation of the catenary and his discovery of
natural logarithms, expressed Cusa's discovery anew from the standpoint
of his infinitesimal calculus. Exemplary is Leibniz's demonstration that
the Pythagorean relationships of the arithmetic, geometric and harmonic
means had a fundamentally transcendental, not arithmetic origin.
Exemplary is the case of the catenary which is expressed as the
arithmetic mean between a pair of {transcendental}
exponential-logarithmic functions. It is, of course, beautifully ironic
to think of an "arithmetic" mean between two transcendental functions,
since such an "arithmetic" relationship could never be given an
arithmetic numerical value, hence Gauss's later emphasis on "higher
arithmetic".\
Another example is Leibniz's discovery that the harmonic series
1-1/3+1/5-1/7+1/9... converges on the transcendental function Pi/4. This
series is called harmonic because each term is the harmonic mean between
its predecessor and its successor. This harmonic relationship is
preserved when the negative values, 1/3, 1/7,1/11 or the positive
values, 1/5, 1/9, 1/13... are taken separately from each other. The
irony of Leibniz's discovery is {not} that an infinite series of
rational numbers produces a transcendental (as the sophistical followers
of Euler write in modern textbooks) but that the harmonic relationship
among these rational numbers is an artifact of the ultimately
transcendental origin of the principle of the harmonic mean. The unified
transcendental origin of the Pythagorean means (arithmetic, geometric
and harmonic) was thoroughly established by Leibniz through his
investigation of the principle of natural logarithms and hyperbolic
functions, including his indication that these concepts must be extended
into what Gauss later called the complex domain. (This historical fact
puts the lie to the dogma of the official "state religion" of modern
mathematics, that Euler discovered the principle of natural logarithms
and extended the theory of logarithms into the complex domain.)\
Despite Leibniz's demonstrations (or perhaps it is better said to spite
them), Euler and his cohorts, Lagrange and D'Alembert, as proponents of
the empiricism of Sarpi, Descartes and Newton, were obsessed with the
use of infinite series. But their fascination went further than simply
looking for a means to calculate numerical values. It was a
psycho-pathology. These empiricists insisted that since physical
principles could not be observed directly through sense-perception, the
functional relationship between a principle and its effect could only be
known to the extent it could be given an arithmetical representation.\
This method of Euler et al. had its origins in the same malignancy with
which the Eleatics and Sophists attacked the method of the Pythagoreans.
As Plato demonstrated in the {Meno} and {Theatetus} dialogues, to {know}
a principle, such as the principle that has the power to double a square
or cube, is to recognize the creative act through which that discovery
is made, even if the result of the discovery can not be expressed in a
finite arithmetical calculation. For example, the magnitude that doubles
the square or cube can be precisely known by geometric construction,
even if it cannot be given a finite expression in terms of the power
that doubles a line. Thus, Theatetus could claim with confidence, and
gain Socrates' admiration for it, that he {knows} the entire species of
square and cubic magnitudes without any reference to their calculation.\
The sophists maliciously insisted that Theatetus could not claim to know
these magnitudes unless he could give them a finite numerical
expression. Yet it is just as absurd to demand that the principle that
has the power to double the area of a square be expressed in terms of
the principle that doubles a line, as it is to demand that the solutions
to the current global economic crisis be expressed in terms acceptable
to the reigning dogma of globalism which has brought about that
collapse.\
But Euler et al., in a direct attack on Cusa's, Kepler's and Leibniz's
demonstration of the physical primacy of transcendental functions,
revived this ancient sophistry, and demanded that a method of
arithmetical calculation must be given before transcendental functions
could be admitted into science. With sophistical flourish, such ability
to calculate was pronounced the only certain form of {knowledge}. For
reasons of mental health, it must be recognized, that this empiricist
trick was not designed for the pragmatic purpose of producing more
accurate calculations, it was an evil-minded spear aimed at the creative
process itself.\
Gauss struck back at the sophistry of Euler and the gang, beginning as
early as his devastating attacks on them in his 1799 treatise on the
fundamental theorem of algebra. Though his own prodigious ability to
calculate was legendary, Gauss recognized that knowledge concerned the
capacity to discover, not calculate by such methods as infinite series.
(Later Gauss was quoted as saying, "infinite series are like paper
money. Sooner or later they have to be converted into gold.")\
Gauss insisted that any formal representation of a function must be
preceded by a discovery of {the principle} that that function is
intended to express. That principle is in turn expressed by a
construction whose ironies direct the mind to recreate the original
discovery of that principle. Such constructions are exemplified by
Archytas's construction for the doubling of the cube or Gauss's own
construction, in the 1799 treatise on the fundamental theorem of
algebra, demonstrating the physical significance of complex numbers.\
Gauss addressed these same fundamental questions with respect to
infinite series in his 1812 {Investigations into the Infinite Series
1+abx/c....}, including establishing, for the first time, under what
conditions could an infinite series be relied upon to converge on a
given value. (Euler, for all his promotion of infinite series, never
even attempted to prove whether the infinite series that he utilized
with abandon actually converged on his assumed limit or diverged away
from it. For example, it can be shown, algebraically, that the geometric
series 1+x+x\^2+x\^3... converges on 1/(1-x). But this is only true if x
is between -1 and 1. If x takes a value outside this interval, the
alleged algebraic equality breaks down. Euler was famous for ignoring
such fallacies in his thinking. Abel, reflecting on Euler's sophistry
and Cauchy's revival of it, said, "divergent series are the work of the
devil".)\
However, as Gauss stated in his summary announcement to his treatise,
this published work contained only a small part of his investigation.
The real subject of Gauss's work on the hypergeometric series was far
more general and profound. It was the fundamental principles underlying
transcendental functions. Though the complete line of his thinking can
only be gleaned from the fragments in his notebooks, he indicated its
direction in the summary announcement to the published work:

"The logarithmic and circular functions, as the simplest kinds of
transcendental functions, are those with which the analysts have been
most occupied. They deserve this honor, both because of their constant
interventions in almost all mathematical investigations, theoretical and
practical, and because of the almost inexhaustible wealth of interesting
truths which their theory expresses."

Gauss also included in this domain of transcendentals his newly
discovered elliptical functions, which, he emphasized, "must be
considered as characteristic of an entirely different species."\
"Transcendental functions", Gauss continued, "have their true source
always, lying openly or concealed, in the infinite". And as such these
transcendentals have been approached through infinite series, of which
the hypergeometric form was one of "far-reaching generality."\
But, Gauss insisted, this "far-reaching generality" of the
hypergeometric series was not due to something special about the series,
as Euler had maintained, but was due to a deeper connection among
transcendental functions themselves. Rather than consider the series as
the source of the transcendental functions, Gauss insisted they be
derived, "from a more universal and applicable source and considered
from a higher standpoint." For Gauss, the properties of the series were
an effect of a more general principle, which he identified as a new type
of function, in which the differentiated hierarchy of species of
transcendentals found their source.\
Gauss sought to know this function, which has become known as the
"hypergeometric {function}, and he delineated some of its essential
characteristics. But it wasn't until Riemann extended Gauss's work on
curvature, conformal mapping, and bi-quadratic residues, to develop his
concept of an anti-Euclidean geometry and what have become known as
"Riemann's surfaces" , that a clear development of this higher domain of
transcendental functions could be expressed. Armed with this
physical-geometric approach, Riemann was able to elaborate a
construction whose ironies recreated the discovery of the hypergeometric
principle, as he emphasized, "virtually without calculation."

Physical Harmonics

The best vantage point from which to approach Gauss's and Riemann's work
in this regard, is from the standpoint of Kepler's development of the
physical harmonics of the solar system.\
Throughout his work, Kepler sought to discover the underlying principles
of astrophysics that expressed themselves, visibly, as harmonic
relationships among the planetary orbits. The first such relationship
that Kepler discovered was the relationship between the five Platonic
solids and the size of the orbits of the visible planets. But if the
orbits were determined only in this way, they would be circular. But
Kepler knew the orbits were really eccentric, not the perfect circles
which Aristotle had insisted were the only form of physical motion. Once
Kepler liberated science from Aristotle's chains of perfect circle to
the more perfect freedom of eccentric orbits, the question he confronted
was, "What was the principle that determined these eccentricities?"\
To answer this question he turned to the Pythagorean concept of
harmonics. As he emphasized in his {Harmonies of the World}, the concept
signified by the Greek word {harmonia}, or its Latin equivalent,
{congruencia}, concerns the effect of unseen principles on the
interaction among things in the sensible world. As he expressed this
idea with respect to the five regular solids, polygons form different
harmonic relationships depending on whether they are situated on a plane
or sphere. For example, four squares fit together perfectly (are
harmonic) in a plane, but only three squares fit together perfectly (are
harmonic) on a spherical surface. Similarly, three pentagons are not
harmonic on a plane, but are harmonic on a spherical surface. It is not
a characteristic of the squares or the pentagons which determines this
harmonic relationship, but the characteristics of the surface in which
they exist. Thus, the uniqueness of the five regular {Platonic} solids
reflects a harmonic characteristic of a spherical surface, not a
characteristic of the squares, triangles or pentagons. Similarly, the
"constructable" divisions of a circle reflect the harmonic
characteristics of the circle, not the polygons that are constructed. In
his essay on the snowflake, Kepler extended his investigation of
harmonics into the micro-physical domain. (Gauss would later give a more
general treatment of Kepler's investigations into the regular solids and
the divisions of the circle in his 1828{General Investigations into
Curved Surfaces} and his 1801 {Disquistiones Arithmeticae}
respectively.)\
To emphasize the point, harmonics are not a characteristic of the things
that fit together, but a characteristic of the underlying manifold in
which they exist. As Kepler put it in his {Harmonies of the World}:

"Therefore, what is true in general of order and of relation is to be
presumed by far the most strongly of harmony, which is based on
proportion, and on the counting of parts which are equal in quantity.
That is to say, for some sensible harmony to exist, and for its essence
to be possible, there must be in addition to two sensible terms a soul
as well which compares them. For if that is taken away, there will
indeed be two terms which are sensible things, but they will not be a
single harmony, which is a thing of reason."

Kepler utilized this method of harmonics to discover the principle that
governed the eccentric motions of the planets. He found that
relationship between the minimum and maximum speeds of neighboring
planets, which, he showed, corresponds to the same harmonic proportions
that humans require to create bel canto polyphonic musical compositions.
This "global" harmonic relationship is expressed within the individual
planetary orbit as Kepler's famous principle of equal areas in equal
times.\
That is, the planets fit together the way they do, not because of
anything inherent in the planetary bodies, or even their orbits, but in
the harmonic characteristics of the physical principles that generated
the solar system itself.

The Hypergeometric Domain

The truthfulness and superiority of Kepler's harmonics over the
empiricist methods of Descartes, Newton, Euler et al. was demonstrated
anew by Gauss when he successfully determinated the orbit of Ceres after
all those authorities who worshiped at the altar of infinite calculation
had failed. (Euler famously lost his sight in one eye trying to
calculate the orbit of a comet. Gauss commented, "I too would have gone
blind had I calculated the way Euler did.").\
This success was followed up by a myriad of discoveries in the domain of
astrophysics, geodesy, geomagnetism and electrodynamics. In previous
installments of this series we have discussed the harmonic relationship
among the least-action pathways of a potential field with respect to the
investigation of Gauss and Dirichlet and Riemann's generalization of
this relationship as, "Dirichlet's Principle". (See Riemann For
Anti-Dummies #'s 53 and 58.) It is relevant for this discussion,
however, to add another example of Gauss's treatment of Kepler's
harmonics.\
One of Gauss's most famous achievements in this respect was his
determination of the harmonic relationship governing changes in the
orbits of Ceres, Pallas, and the other large asteroids. While the orbits
of these asteroids all conformed to Kepler's harmonic relationship,
Gauss investigated the tiny variations in the eccentricity of these
planetary orbits which were due to the interaction of these asteroids
with the larger planets, such as Jupiter. Such variations existed for
the major planets, and were known to Kepler, but their magnitudes were
so small that it was difficult to successfully study them. However, with
the asteroids, these non-uniform changes in the non-uniform elliptical
orbits were large enough for Gauss not only to measure, but to form an
hypothesis concerning an additional harmonic relationship. To determine
this relationship, Gauss imagined the mass of the outer planet, such as
Jupiter, to be distributed in an infinitely thin ring along its orbit
proportional to Kepler's equal area principle. He then thought of the
effect of this ring on the motion of the asteroid's orbit around the
Sun. Thus, he thought of the asteroid as moving in a potential field
that was bounded on the inside by the Sun and on the outside by the
imagined ring. From this construction Gauss was able to construct an
elliptical function that precisely reflected the dynamic harmonics of
the non-uniform effect of Jupiter's orbit on the asteroid, even though
this relationship is a highly non-linear transcendental relationship.
Gauss further showed that this elliptical function was associated with
his discovery of the arithmetic-geometric mean, which also led him into
a study of the hypergeometric function. (For a summary account this work
of Gauss see the pedagogical "Dance with the Planets" by Bruce Director
at www.wlym.com)\
Noting this and the many other appearances in physics and astronomy of
such hypergeometric transcendentals, Gauss and Riemann insisted that it
were necessary to develop a general understanding of the characteristics
of this hypergeometric domain.\
Since the clearest understanding of these characteristics is only
obtained from the vantage point of Riemann's employment of his surfaces,
we interpolate, as Riemann did in his original work, a short, animated
review of the Riemann surface. This review may seem a bit arduous when
reading through the text, but let the animations do their work. Focus on
the ironies among them and these difficulties will be greatly reduced.\
Riemann's development of his surfaces proceeds directly from Gauss's
work on conformal mapping, curvature and potential. In his Copenhagen
Prize Essay, Gauss had shown that the conformal mapping of any surface
onto another was the effect of the harmonic relationship between its
curves of maximum and minimum curvature, and that such a harmonic
relationship could be expressed by functions of a complex variable.
(This is the origin of what have fraudulently been called the
Cauchy-Riemann equations, which should be renamed, for historical
accuracy, the Gauss-Riemann equations.)\
Riemann took this to its next step. Instead of defining a complex
function by an equation and then investigating the implied geometrical
characteristics, Riemann showed that the geometrical characteristics of
conformal mapping defined the function independent of whatever equation
some formalist might wish to use to describe it.\
It is important to emphasize that to understand Riemann's geometric
constructions (as is also the case in constructing pedagogical
animations of economic processes), one must purge the mind of the
formalist remnants of Cartesian graphs. Riemann mappings are not graphs
that compare one linear parameter to another. Riemann mappings express a
dynamic harmonic among parameters that are themselves multiply connected
manifolds.\
Pedagogically, this becomes most clear through an animated series of
examples of Riemann's surfaces. Animated figure 1 shows the geometry of
the complex cubic function. On the left panel, an harmonic function is
depicted extending over 1/3 of a circular disk.

Using Gauss's representation, each point on the disk can be represented
by a complex number denoted by the length of a line drawn from that
point to the center of the disk, and the angle that line makes with a
given direction. (That direction is marked by the black arrow in the
animation.) Under the complex cubic transformation, each point on the
disk on the left is mapped to a point on the disk on the right by
tripling the angle it makes with the black line, and cubing the length
of the line that connects it to the center. This produces a conformal
map of the 1/3 disk on the left to the complete disk on the right. The
conformality of the mapping is expressed by the invariance of the
orthogonality of the arcs and radial lines on both sides. Further, as
Gauss and Riemann emphasized, the conformality of the mapping reflects
the preservation of a harmonic relationship between the minimum and
maximum curvatures as, for example, in the case of a electro-magnetic or
gravitational potential.\
This geometrical construction brings to the surface two ambiguities of
cubic functions that only appear when the function is extended to the
complex domain. The first, obvious ambiguity is that since the 1/3 disk
on the left maps to a complete disk on the right, what happens if the
function is extended to the other 2/3 of the disk on the left? In
animated figure 2, it is shown that when this is done, the other two
thirds are apparently mapped onto the same disk as the first 1/3.

Inversely, every point of the disk on the right maps to three distinctly
different points on the disk on the left.\
The other ambiguity that emerges is: what is the effect of the function
outside the boundary of the disk? Under Euler's knuckle-headed approach
of infinite series, the only way to know is to extend the disk a little
bit, and see what happens, and then extend it some more, and some more
......\
These ambiguities, however, are only an effect of the assumptions
embedded in the fantasy-world of Cartesian geometry. To eliminate them,
Riemann rejected Cartesianism and adopted a more advanced form of
Pythagorean sphaerics as it had been pioneered, first by Cusa, and then
by Gauss in his use of spherical mappings of curved surfaces. On the
spherical form of Riemann's surfaces, what had appeared to be unbounded,
is mapped onto a self-bounded sphere. This removes the false ambiguities
inherent in a Cartesian "fish-bowl" so that the discontinuities that
appear on the spherical surface reflect matters of principle.\
An example of this can be seen in the following series of animations. In
animated figure 3, the cubic function illustrated in figures 1 and 2 is
mapped, stereographically, onto the sphere. (Animated figure 4 shows the
conformality of this mapping.)

Now what had appeared to be infinitely far way, in the Cartesian form of
animations 1 and 2, is mapped to a single point, the north pole, which
becomes a second pivot for the rotation ascribed by the cubic function.\
Riemann resolved the indeterminancy of having one point map to three and
three points mapping to one by creating a multi-layered sphere. In this
way, those points that appeared to map onto the same place in the
Cartesian form, were mapped onto different layers (branches) of the
Riemann sphere. In our cubic example, the part of the sphere on the left
which is colored red, maps to the red layer on the right, which covers
an entire sphere. Similarly with the blue and yellow sections. The
branches of the sphere on the right are connected to each other at the
poles by what Riemann called branch points which he said should be
thought of as, "helicoids with infinitely small pitch".\
The boundaries between the branches on the left map to a single curve on
the right which, on both spheres, extends from one branch point to the
other. This curve Riemann called a branch cut across which the layers of
the sphere on the right could be connected to each other, in conformity
with their images on the left.\
In this way both spheres become continuous surfaces. But it is important
{not} to think of this construction as two different surfaces. Construct
in your mind as one idea, as Riemann instructed, one single surface
comprised of the essential characteristics of both spheres. Such a
surface cannot be visualized externally, but like all works of art, or
true ideas of science, it can be sensed in the mind as a real object of
thought. The visual representation, as depicted in these animations,
must be considered as merely two different views of the same object, and
the mapping to be a continuous transformation within that object. To
facilitate the generation of this idea, use the principle of inversion,
as in a musical composition. The mapping depicted in the animation is
just as much a mapping of the right sphere onto the left as vice versa.
Thus, to understand a complexfunction, one must also think,
simultaneously, of its inverse. The unified action and its inverse are
only separated in this visible form because of the inherent limitations
of sense-perception. Nevertheless, the cognitive powers of the mind
enable us to form the required, unified image.\
The continuity of these surfaces is illustrated in animated figure 5.

As the black curve traces its pathway on the left sphere, its image
follows a conformal path on the right. When the curve crosses the
different partitions of the left sphere, its image crosses from one
branch to another on the right. Again think of this also, inversely, as
the curve on the right being "unwound" onto the surface on the left.\
The different branches of the function appear in the left view as
partitions of a single sphere, while in the right view they appear as
different layers over an entire sphere. Any action in a part of the left
sphere, maps to an action on the same branch of the right. If an action
crosses from one branch to another on the left, its image crosses to the
same branches on the right, and vice versa.\
In this way, the Riemann spherical mapping can express a complex
function as an advanced form of the Pythagorean-Keplerian harmonic
division of a surface.\
On the layered sphere every point will correspond to other points on
different layers that are directly above or below it. These points will
each be an image of distinct point on the sphere on the left. Gauss
called such points {congruent, i.e., harmonic} to each other, relative
to the modulus of the function. In our example of the cubic function,
that modulus is 2Pi/3, because a rotation by that angle will exactly map
each branch onto another. Further, as is the case for all algebraic
functions, this modulus has a finite periodicity. In our example, one
rotation of 2Pi/3 will map the red part to the blue and the blue to the
yellow and the yellow to the red. A second rotation will map the red to
the yellow, the blue to the red and the yellow to the blue, and so on.
But, after three such rotations, the process only repeats itself.\
Further, the divisions into three branches (for the case of the cubic
function) is independent of the particular position of the branch-cuts.
It is the nature of the cubic function to generate a harmonic division
with three branches, in the same way that the uniqueness of the regular
spherical solids is independent of the positions of the polygons on the
spherical surface. The former is a function only of the harmonic
characteristics of the sphere, not of position on the sphere. This is a
characteristic of what Riemann adopted from Leibniz as "analysis
situs".\
Riemann called this characteristic the {modulus of periodicity}, which
implicitly defines a new type of function, which he and Gauss called,
{modular functions}. The characteristics of this modular function are
defined by the way the branch points, singularities and branches fit
together harmonically. For Riemann, this characteristic of analysis
situs {defines} the function, not any explicit algebraic formula.\
To illustrate this look at animated figures 6, 7, 8, which show the
change in the Riemann's surface corresponding to a change in the
algebraic formula from w=z\^3 to w=1-z\^3.

The change in the algebraic formula has the geometric effect of moving
the roots of the function from one point (the south pole in the first
case) to three different points (all located on the equator) in the
second case. Though this change produces a slight variation in the
effect on the sphere on the right, the analysis situs, i.e., the modulus
of periodicity, the number of branch points and branch-cuts, does not
change. The harmonic relationships expressed by the modularity of the
function are essentially the same.\
Animated figure 9 illustrates the Riemann sphere for a different
algebraic function with an added singularity--a pole.

This results in an harmonic division that divides the left sphere into
four quadrants. Each quadrant maps to an entire layer of the sphere on
the right. But as the animation illustrates, because of the presence of
the pole, the two quadrants in the "southern" hemisphere on the left are
mapped from the "north" pole southward, on the right. This effect is
reversed in the mappings of the left sphere's "northern" quadrants.\
The further effect of the analysis situs can be seen in animated figure
10.

A pathway around the south pole on the left maps to a pathway around the
north pole on the right, and, because the pathway on the left crosses
two quadrants, its image produces a doubling of the rotation in its
image on the right. In animated figure 11, a pathway around a branch
point where all four quadrants come together, still produces only a
doubling of the rotation on the right.

This is because the pathway on the left only spends one-fourth of its
rotation in each quadrant.\
This harmonic relationship is associated with a change in the
characteristic of the associated modular function. For the example just
illustrated, that modular function must express two actions.: One that
rotates the sphere by 180 degrees and the other that inverts the
northern and southern hemispheres. As in our previous example a finite
combination of these actions, along with the characteristics of the
branch points, defines the totality of the action expressed by the
function.\
But these are only the Riemann surfaces for algebraic functions. The fun
only really begins with the transcendental functions. In what follows we
will be greatly aided by Riemann's direction and investigate these
functions from the standpoint of analysis situs freed from the illusions
inherent in an algebraic formula.\
The simplest transcendentals, as Cusa and Leibniz demonstrated, are the
higher species from which all the lower algebraic functions are derived.
This characteristic emerges clearly from the standpoint of Riemann's
surfaces as a fundamental shift in the nature of the associated modular
function. As we just illustrated, the modular function associated with
the algebraic species divides the entire self-bounded surface of the
sphere into a finite number of parts, which by a finite number of
rotations, or inversions, can completely describe the harmonic
relationships of the function.\
However, the transcendental functions, when expressed by the associated
Riemann surfaces, are characterized by a harmonic relationship that
divides the sphere into an infinite number of parts.\
This is a manifestation of Gauss's assertion that the transcendental has
its true source in the infinite. But as the following examples will
illustrate, that source cannot be depicted by the undifferentiated
endless blah of Aristotle's, Descartes' or Euler's infinite. Rather it
must be thought of as the domain of increasing perfectability which
Plato, Cusa and Leibniz ascribed to the actual universe. As Leibniz put
it in his {Discourse on Metaphysics}:

"God has chosen the most perfect world, that is, the one which is at the
same time simplest in hypotheses and the richest in phenomena, as might
be a line in geometry whose construction is easy and whose properties
and effects are extremely remarkable and widespread."

Thus to understand this domain of the transcendental functions we must
proceed with Riemann's method, that is we must investigate those
functions from the standpoint of analysis situs, {not} algebraic
formulas.\
Begin this stage with an investigation of the complex
logarithmic-exponential which is the function that expresses the
relationship between the arithmetic and geometric. As we illustrated in
previous installments in this series, these simple transcendentals are
simply-periodic. (See Riemann for Anti-Dummies Part 62.)\
The Riemann surface for such a simply-periodic function is illustrated
in animated figure 12.

The different colored segments of the left sphere are conformally mapped
to a branch that covers an entire sphere on the right. And as is evident
from the animation, the number of segments of the left sphere is
infinite. Thus, the Riemann surface for the complex exponential divides
the left sphere into an ifinite number of segments and produces a sphere
on the right with an infinite number of layers.\
Animated figure 13 shows this same mapping with the sphere on the left
projected down onto a plane.

Here one can see each layer of the sphere on the right is mapped onto a
strip on the left. That strip is bounded in the vertical direction, but
is infinite in the horizontal directon.\
This harmonic division, generated by the complex exponential, defines an
entirely different type of modular function. The modulus of periodicity
is finite (i\*2Pi) but the periodicity of the modulus is infinite!\
But the logarithmic-exponential is only the first, and simplest species
of transcendental. As Gauss emphasized, the elliptical transcendentals
are an entirely different species. As we discussed in previous
installments of this series, these transcendental functions arise when
two transcendental actions are acting together to produce a single
effect. The simplest examples are the case of the elliptical orbit, in
which the double incommensurability of the arc with the sine and the arc
with the angle combine to produce the unified non-uniform elliptical
motion and the simple circular pendulum. As Riemann and Gauss emphasized
the distinguishing characteristic of elliptical functions is their
double-periodicity. (See Riemann for Anti-Dummies Parts 62 and 63.)\
Here again Euler's fraud is exposed. Both the simple and elliptical
transcendentals can be given an infinite expression in terms of Euler's
formal construction of the hypergeometric series. But from the
standpoint of the harmonic relationships that emerge with the relevant
Riemann's surfaces, it can be shown that the "infinite" from which these
two transcendentals arise is not the same.\
Animated figure 14 begins to illustrate this.

Since the elliptical function is doubly periodic, it appears on the
Riemann surface as a mapping of a doubly bounded parallelogram on the
left sphere to a layer covering the entire right sphere. To show that
this mapping is conformal and harmonic, this animation shows the
orthogonal green and white curves on the left being mapped to a set of
orthogonal periodic curves on the right. In the subsequent animations,
only one set of these curves is shown in order to make the animation
more visually intelligible.\
Animated figure 15 illustrates that there are an infinite number of
parallelograms on the left sphere, each of which constitutes an entire
branch of the function and thus maps to a layer on the right sphere that
covers the entire sphere.

Animated figure 16 shows the same function with the branches of the
sphere on the left projected onto a plane.

Thus the branches of the elliptical functions are doubly bounded
parallelograms, producing an infinite harmonic division of the sphere.
This harmonic division has a greater density of branches than the
infinite strips of the simply periodic simple transcendentals.\
What becomes even more evident from the standpoint of Riemann's
surfaces, and most relevant for understanding the more universal
epistemological implications of Riemann's ideas, is that the elliptical
modular function expresses a greater density of singularities than the
simple transcendentals.\
This increased density of singularities is brought to light when we
trace the pathways of the Riemann surface that go from zero to the
infinite. This is illustrated in animated figure 17.

In the figure, the elliptical period parallelograms are outlined in
white, and are drawn so that their corners correspond to the points
which map to the south pole (zero) on the right sphere. Here we see on
the left, orthogonal lines emanating from a corner where the
parallelograms meet, and extending to a point near the center of the
period parallelogram. The images of these lines, on the right sphere, go
from the south pole to the north (from zero to the infinite) and there
are four distinct directions. Animated figure 18 shows this same mapping
with the left sphere projected onto a plane.

Animated figures 18a and 18b show these paths to the poles with the
period parallelograms drawn so that the center of the parallelogram
corresponds to zero and the corners correspond to the poles.

Figure 18c shows a surface representation where each pole has both a
positive and negative direction.

Thus, in the elliptical transcendental, each branch of the function
contains a pole, and since there are four paths to each pole, this pole
has double the effect on the mapping of the simple poles of the sphere.
Riemann denoted this as a pole of the second degree. What is most
important to emphasize, is that the modular function associated with the
elliptical transcendentals has a greater density of singularities than
is possible for the simple transcendentals.\
Because of this doubly periodic nature of these elliptical functions and
the associated greater power of its poles, Riemann insisted the
geometrical structure of these functions did not conform to the simple
spherical action, and could only be competently mapped onto a torus.
Animated figures 19 and 20 show that the intrinsic geometry of the torus
is congruent with this double periodicity elliptical functions.

Riemann continued these investigations beyond the elliptical case and
into the domain of the hyper-elliptical or, Abelian functions. When
these functions are expressed by Riemann's surfaces and their associated
modular functions. It becomes clear that each higher species of
transcendental function is characterized by a harmonic division with a
greater density of singularities. We will have to leave to future
installments a further investigation into the anyalsis situs of these
higher transcendentals, but you can already glimpse its nature from
figure 21 which shows a sketch by Gauss of the modular harmonics
associated with the next highest transcendental.

Looking back from the standpoint of the richness of Gauss's and
Riemann's ideas, it is a wonder why anyone would allow themselves to be
enslaved by the sophistry of Euler's infinitely boring calculations.
:::

::: {.addtoany_share_save_container .addtoany_content_bottom}
::: {.a2a_kit .a2a_kit_size_32 .addtoany_list a2a-url="http://lymcanada.org/64/" a2a-title="Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 64 :  Hypergeometric Harmonics"}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F64%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2064%20%3A%20%20Hypergeometric%20Harmonics "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F64%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2064%20%3A%20%20Hypergeometric%20Harmonics "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/google_plus?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F64%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2064%20%3A%20%20Hypergeometric%20Harmonics "Google+"){.a2a_button_google_plus}
[](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd .addtoany_share_save}
:::
:::
:::

[ [ Posted on ]{.screen-reader-text} [February 20, 2010 February 24,
2019](http://lymcanada.org/64/) ]{.posted-on} [ [ [ Author
]{.screen-reader-text} [Bruce
Director](http://lymcanada.org/author/bdirector/){.url .fn .n} ]{.author
.vcard} ]{.byline} [ [ Categories ]{.screen-reader-text}
[EN](http://lymcanada.org/category/en/) , [Riemmann for
Anti-Dummies](http://lymcanada.org/category/science-1/c132-riemmann-for-anti-dummies/)
]{.cat-links}

::: entry-header
# Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 64 : Hypergeometric Harmonics {#riemann-for-anti-dummies-part-64-hypergeometric-harmonics-1 .entry-title}
:::

::: entry-content
::: pf-content
## Hypergeometric Harmonics

by Bruce Director

In the same year that Riemann published his {Theory of Abelian
Functions}, he also produced a companion piece of equal significance
titled {Contributions to the Theory of Functions representable by
Gauss's Series F(a,b,c,x). The content of these works was the polished
product of material Riemann developed in a series of lectures delivered
at Goettingen University during the 1855-56 interval and through earlier
discussions with Gauss and Dirichlet. [ ]{#more-968} When taken together
with his 1854 Habilitation dissertation, these works developed the
crucial discoveries that established the epistemological basis for the
future development of science. Like all such fundamental discoveries, it
has a history, that begins with the Pythagorean development of the
Egyptian science of "sphaerics" , weaves its way through the Renaissance
achievements of Cusa, Leonardo and Pacioli, and emerges in the work of
Kepler, Fermat and Leibniz. Also, as with all creative discoveries,
Riemann's method is antagonistic to the sophistries of the Eleatics,
Aristotle, the empiricism of Sarpi, Descartes and Newton, and the
formalism of Kaestner's and Gauss's adversaries, Euler, Lagrange and
D'Alembert. As such, the study of Riemann's treatment of what was
otherwise known as the "hypergeometric function", provides us an
opportunity to investigate a subject of universal import, whose
significance extends far beyond its specific expression in the domain of
physical science.\
Therefore, to understand Riemann's discovery, it is necessary to lay an
adequate foundation by situating these concepts with respect to the
history of ideas. This can be done pedagogically by pivoting our
discussion on Kepler's amplification of the Pythagorean/Platonic concept
of harmonics into modern astro and micro physical investigations. But
before turning to Kepler, it would be useful to summarily identify some
specifics of the matter as it would have presented itself to Gauss and
Riemann, because the general level of scientific illiteracy today is so
high that only a few are able to recognize what would have been standard
knowledge among Gauss's and Riemann's qualified contemporaries.

Calculating is Not Knowing

The series that Riemann referred to as "Gauss's series", is formally
represented as an infinite series of the following form:

1+ ((ab)\*x)/(1\*c) + (a(a+1)b(b+1)\*x\^2)/(1\*2\*c(c+1))) +
(a(a+1)(a+2)b(b+1)(b+2)\*x\^3)/(1\*2\*3\*c(c+1)(c+2)....

It had been studied previously by Euler, who believed it to be a type of
magic potion, which, if the right values for a, b, c and x were chosen,
could be transformed into an infinite series that Euler could use to
approximate the numerical values of algebraic, circular and logarithmic
functions. For example, F(1, 1, 1, x) forms the geometric series
1+x+x\^2+x\^3....; t\^nF(-n, d, d,-u/t) forms an infinite series that,
algebraically, converges on (t+u)\^n; xF(½, ½, 3/2, x\^2) forms an
infinite series that, algebraically, converges on the arcsine of x ;
tF(1,1,2,-u/t) converges on the natural logarithm of (1+t). And there
are many other cases of algebraic and transcendental relationships that
can be given a formal expression by this series. Euler alleged that if a
formal, deductive relationship could be presented between an infinite
series and a function on which it apparently converged, the two should
be considered equivalent expressions of the same idea.\
But Euler was deliberately obfuscating the epistemological questions
underlying infinite series that had been definitively settled by
Nicholas of Cusa in his sermons on the quadrature of the circle. As is
evident from Cusa's constructions, the circle could never be defined as
the limit of the infinite process of dividing the sides of a polygon,
because no such repetitive process could ever produce a circle. On the
other hand, a circle could produce a succession of polygons with an
increasing number of sides. Consequently, Cusa insisted, the circle was
generated by an entirely different power, one which Leibniz would later
call "transcendental", as distinguished from the lower, "algebraic"
domain of the polygons. It was this transcendental nature of the circle,
Cusa emphasized, from which the polygons obtained their characteristics,
not the other way around.\
The ontological implications of Cusa's discovery re-emerged in
connection with Kepler's effort to determine the nature of the
non-uniform physical action of the elliptical planetary orbits. As
Kepler emphasized in his {New Astronomy}, the position and time of a
planet could be calculated to any degree of accuracy he desired, but he
could not give them an exact numerical value because their relationship
depended on both the angle and its sine, whose proportions are
incommensurable with each other, and as such, cannot be expressed by a
finite arithmetical relationship. Kepler, recognizing that the presence
of such an incommensurability signified the existence of an underlying,
yet to be discovered principle, called for a new mathematics--which
emerged as Leibniz's calculus and the development of elliptical
functions by Gauss, Abel, Jacobi and Riemann. Kepler's call did not
arise from a concern for a more accurate means to calculate the
numerical values. He had already devised sufficient methods to achieve
the highest degree of arithmetical accuracy possible. His concern was to
express a more exact knowledge of the {principle} on which the planet's
motion was based, and the non-uniform changing effect of that principle
on the planet.\
Leibniz, through his investigation of the catenary and his discovery of
natural logarithms, expressed Cusa's discovery anew from the standpoint
of his infinitesimal calculus. Exemplary is Leibniz's demonstration that
the Pythagorean relationships of the arithmetic, geometric and harmonic
means had a fundamentally transcendental, not arithmetic origin.
Exemplary is the case of the catenary which is expressed as the
arithmetic mean between a pair of {transcendental}
exponential-logarithmic functions. It is, of course, beautifully ironic
to think of an "arithmetic" mean between two transcendental functions,
since such an "arithmetic" relationship could never be given an
arithmetic numerical value, hence Gauss's later emphasis on "higher
arithmetic".\
Another example is Leibniz's discovery that the harmonic series
1-1/3+1/5-1/7+1/9... converges on the transcendental function Pi/4. This
series is called harmonic because each term is the harmonic mean between
its predecessor and its successor. This harmonic relationship is
preserved when the negative values, 1/3, 1/7,1/11 or the positive
values, 1/5, 1/9, 1/13... are taken separately from each other. The
irony of Leibniz's discovery is {not} that an infinite series of
rational numbers produces a transcendental (as the sophistical followers
of Euler write in modern textbooks) but that the harmonic relationship
among these rational numbers is an artifact of the ultimately
transcendental origin of the principle of the harmonic mean. The unified
transcendental origin of the Pythagorean means (arithmetic, geometric
and harmonic) was thoroughly established by Leibniz through his
investigation of the principle of natural logarithms and hyperbolic
functions, including his indication that these concepts must be extended
into what Gauss later called the complex domain. (This historical fact
puts the lie to the dogma of the official "state religion" of modern
mathematics, that Euler discovered the principle of natural logarithms
and extended the theory of logarithms into the complex domain.)\
Despite Leibniz's demonstrations (or perhaps it is better said to spite
them), Euler and his cohorts, Lagrange and D'Alembert, as proponents of
the empiricism of Sarpi, Descartes and Newton, were obsessed with the
use of infinite series. But their fascination went further than simply
looking for a means to calculate numerical values. It was a
psycho-pathology. These empiricists insisted that since physical
principles could not be observed directly through sense-perception, the
functional relationship between a principle and its effect could only be
known to the extent it could be given an arithmetical representation.\
This method of Euler et al. had its origins in the same malignancy with
which the Eleatics and Sophists attacked the method of the Pythagoreans.
As Plato demonstrated in the {Meno} and {Theatetus} dialogues, to {know}
a principle, such as the principle that has the power to double a square
or cube, is to recognize the creative act through which that discovery
is made, even if the result of the discovery can not be expressed in a
finite arithmetical calculation. For example, the magnitude that doubles
the square or cube can be precisely known by geometric construction,
even if it cannot be given a finite expression in terms of the power
that doubles a line. Thus, Theatetus could claim with confidence, and
gain Socrates' admiration for it, that he {knows} the entire species of
square and cubic magnitudes without any reference to their calculation.\
The sophists maliciously insisted that Theatetus could not claim to know
these magnitudes unless he could give them a finite numerical
expression. Yet it is just as absurd to demand that the principle that
has the power to double the area of a square be expressed in terms of
the principle that doubles a line, as it is to demand that the solutions
to the current global economic crisis be expressed in terms acceptable
to the reigning dogma of globalism which has brought about that
collapse.\
But Euler et al., in a direct attack on Cusa's, Kepler's and Leibniz's
demonstration of the physical primacy of transcendental functions,
revived this ancient sophistry, and demanded that a method of
arithmetical calculation must be given before transcendental functions
could be admitted into science. With sophistical flourish, such ability
to calculate was pronounced the only certain form of {knowledge}. For
reasons of mental health, it must be recognized, that this empiricist
trick was not designed for the pragmatic purpose of producing more
accurate calculations, it was an evil-minded spear aimed at the creative
process itself.\
Gauss struck back at the sophistry of Euler and the gang, beginning as
early as his devastating attacks on them in his 1799 treatise on the
fundamental theorem of algebra. Though his own prodigious ability to
calculate was legendary, Gauss recognized that knowledge concerned the
capacity to discover, not calculate by such methods as infinite series.
(Later Gauss was quoted as saying, "infinite series are like paper
money. Sooner or later they have to be converted into gold.")\
Gauss insisted that any formal representation of a function must be
preceded by a discovery of {the principle} that that function is
intended to express. That principle is in turn expressed by a
construction whose ironies direct the mind to recreate the original
discovery of that principle. Such constructions are exemplified by
Archytas's construction for the doubling of the cube or Gauss's own
construction, in the 1799 treatise on the fundamental theorem of
algebra, demonstrating the physical significance of complex numbers.\
Gauss addressed these same fundamental questions with respect to
infinite series in his 1812 {Investigations into the Infinite Series
1+abx/c....}, including establishing, for the first time, under what
conditions could an infinite series be relied upon to converge on a
given value. (Euler, for all his promotion of infinite series, never
even attempted to prove whether the infinite series that he utilized
with abandon actually converged on his assumed limit or diverged away
from it. For example, it can be shown, algebraically, that the geometric
series 1+x+x\^2+x\^3... converges on 1/(1-x). But this is only true if x
is between -1 and 1. If x takes a value outside this interval, the
alleged algebraic equality breaks down. Euler was famous for ignoring
such fallacies in his thinking. Abel, reflecting on Euler's sophistry
and Cauchy's revival of it, said, "divergent series are the work of the
devil".)\
However, as Gauss stated in his summary announcement to his treatise,
this published work contained only a small part of his investigation.
The real subject of Gauss's work on the hypergeometric series was far
more general and profound. It was the fundamental principles underlying
transcendental functions. Though the complete line of his thinking can
only be gleaned from the fragments in his notebooks, he indicated its
direction in the summary announcement to the published work:

"The logarithmic and circular functions, as the simplest kinds of
transcendental functions, are those with which the analysts have been
most occupied. They deserve this honor, both because of their constant
interventions in almost all mathematical investigations, theoretical and
practical, and because of the almost inexhaustible wealth of interesting
truths which their theory expresses."

Gauss also included in this domain of transcendentals his newly
discovered elliptical functions, which, he emphasized, "must be
considered as characteristic of an entirely different species."\
"Transcendental functions", Gauss continued, "have their true source
always, lying openly or concealed, in the infinite". And as such these
transcendentals have been approached through infinite series, of which
the hypergeometric form was one of "far-reaching generality."\
But, Gauss insisted, this "far-reaching generality" of the
hypergeometric series was not due to something special about the series,
as Euler had maintained, but was due to a deeper connection among
transcendental functions themselves. Rather than consider the series as
the source of the transcendental functions, Gauss insisted they be
derived, "from a more universal and applicable source and considered
from a higher standpoint." For Gauss, the properties of the series were
an effect of a more general principle, which he identified as a new type
of function, in which the differentiated hierarchy of species of
transcendentals found their source.\
Gauss sought to know this function, which has become known as the
"hypergeometric {function}, and he delineated some of its essential
characteristics. But it wasn't until Riemann extended Gauss's work on
curvature, conformal mapping, and bi-quadratic residues, to develop his
concept of an anti-Euclidean geometry and what have become known as
"Riemann's surfaces" , that a clear development of this higher domain of
transcendental functions could be expressed. Armed with this
physical-geometric approach, Riemann was able to elaborate a
construction whose ironies recreated the discovery of the hypergeometric
principle, as he emphasized, "virtually without calculation."

Physical Harmonics

The best vantage point from which to approach Gauss's and Riemann's work
in this regard, is from the standpoint of Kepler's development of the
physical harmonics of the solar system.\
Throughout his work, Kepler sought to discover the underlying principles
of astrophysics that expressed themselves, visibly, as harmonic
relationships among the planetary orbits. The first such relationship
that Kepler discovered was the relationship between the five Platonic
solids and the size of the orbits of the visible planets. But if the
orbits were determined only in this way, they would be circular. But
Kepler knew the orbits were really eccentric, not the perfect circles
which Aristotle had insisted were the only form of physical motion. Once
Kepler liberated science from Aristotle's chains of perfect circle to
the more perfect freedom of eccentric orbits, the question he confronted
was, "What was the principle that determined these eccentricities?"\
To answer this question he turned to the Pythagorean concept of
harmonics. As he emphasized in his {Harmonies of the World}, the concept
signified by the Greek word {harmonia}, or its Latin equivalent,
{congruencia}, concerns the effect of unseen principles on the
interaction among things in the sensible world. As he expressed this
idea with respect to the five regular solids, polygons form different
harmonic relationships depending on whether they are situated on a plane
or sphere. For example, four squares fit together perfectly (are
harmonic) in a plane, but only three squares fit together perfectly (are
harmonic) on a spherical surface. Similarly, three pentagons are not
harmonic on a plane, but are harmonic on a spherical surface. It is not
a characteristic of the squares or the pentagons which determines this
harmonic relationship, but the characteristics of the surface in which
they exist. Thus, the uniqueness of the five regular {Platonic} solids
reflects a harmonic characteristic of a spherical surface, not a
characteristic of the squares, triangles or pentagons. Similarly, the
"constructable" divisions of a circle reflect the harmonic
characteristics of the circle, not the polygons that are constructed. In
his essay on the snowflake, Kepler extended his investigation of
harmonics into the micro-physical domain. (Gauss would later give a more
general treatment of Kepler's investigations into the regular solids and
the divisions of the circle in his 1828{General Investigations into
Curved Surfaces} and his 1801 {Disquistiones Arithmeticae}
respectively.)\
To emphasize the point, harmonics are not a characteristic of the things
that fit together, but a characteristic of the underlying manifold in
which they exist. As Kepler put it in his {Harmonies of the World}:

"Therefore, what is true in general of order and of relation is to be
presumed by far the most strongly of harmony, which is based on
proportion, and on the counting of parts which are equal in quantity.
That is to say, for some sensible harmony to exist, and for its essence
to be possible, there must be in addition to two sensible terms a soul
as well which compares them. For if that is taken away, there will
indeed be two terms which are sensible things, but they will not be a
single harmony, which is a thing of reason."

Kepler utilized this method of harmonics to discover the principle that
governed the eccentric motions of the planets. He found that
relationship between the minimum and maximum speeds of neighboring
planets, which, he showed, corresponds to the same harmonic proportions
that humans require to create bel canto polyphonic musical compositions.
This "global" harmonic relationship is expressed within the individual
planetary orbit as Kepler's famous principle of equal areas in equal
times.\
That is, the planets fit together the way they do, not because of
anything inherent in the planetary bodies, or even their orbits, but in
the harmonic characteristics of the physical principles that generated
the solar system itself.

The Hypergeometric Domain

The truthfulness and superiority of Kepler's harmonics over the
empiricist methods of Descartes, Newton, Euler et al. was demonstrated
anew by Gauss when he successfully determinated the orbit of Ceres after
all those authorities who worshiped at the altar of infinite calculation
had failed. (Euler famously lost his sight in one eye trying to
calculate the orbit of a comet. Gauss commented, "I too would have gone
blind had I calculated the way Euler did.").\
This success was followed up by a myriad of discoveries in the domain of
astrophysics, geodesy, geomagnetism and electrodynamics. In previous
installments of this series we have discussed the harmonic relationship
among the least-action pathways of a potential field with respect to the
investigation of Gauss and Dirichlet and Riemann's generalization of
this relationship as, "Dirichlet's Principle". (See Riemann For
Anti-Dummies #'s 53 and 58.) It is relevant for this discussion,
however, to add another example of Gauss's treatment of Kepler's
harmonics.\
One of Gauss's most famous achievements in this respect was his
determination of the harmonic relationship governing changes in the
orbits of Ceres, Pallas, and the other large asteroids. While the orbits
of these asteroids all conformed to Kepler's harmonic relationship,
Gauss investigated the tiny variations in the eccentricity of these
planetary orbits which were due to the interaction of these asteroids
with the larger planets, such as Jupiter. Such variations existed for
the major planets, and were known to Kepler, but their magnitudes were
so small that it was difficult to successfully study them. However, with
the asteroids, these non-uniform changes in the non-uniform elliptical
orbits were large enough for Gauss not only to measure, but to form an
hypothesis concerning an additional harmonic relationship. To determine
this relationship, Gauss imagined the mass of the outer planet, such as
Jupiter, to be distributed in an infinitely thin ring along its orbit
proportional to Kepler's equal area principle. He then thought of the
effect of this ring on the motion of the asteroid's orbit around the
Sun. Thus, he thought of the asteroid as moving in a potential field
that was bounded on the inside by the Sun and on the outside by the
imagined ring. From this construction Gauss was able to construct an
elliptical function that precisely reflected the dynamic harmonics of
the non-uniform effect of Jupiter's orbit on the asteroid, even though
this relationship is a highly non-linear transcendental relationship.
Gauss further showed that this elliptical function was associated with
his discovery of the arithmetic-geometric mean, which also led him into
a study of the hypergeometric function. (For a summary account this work
of Gauss see the pedagogical "Dance with the Planets" by Bruce Director
at www.wlym.com)\
Noting this and the many other appearances in physics and astronomy of
such hypergeometric transcendentals, Gauss and Riemann insisted that it
were necessary to develop a general understanding of the characteristics
of this hypergeometric domain.\
Since the clearest understanding of these characteristics is only
obtained from the vantage point of Riemann's employment of his surfaces,
we interpolate, as Riemann did in his original work, a short, animated
review of the Riemann surface. This review may seem a bit arduous when
reading through the text, but let the animations do their work. Focus on
the ironies among them and these difficulties will be greatly reduced.\
Riemann's development of his surfaces proceeds directly from Gauss's
work on conformal mapping, curvature and potential. In his Copenhagen
Prize Essay, Gauss had shown that the conformal mapping of any surface
onto another was the effect of the harmonic relationship between its
curves of maximum and minimum curvature, and that such a harmonic
relationship could be expressed by functions of a complex variable.
(This is the origin of what have fraudulently been called the
Cauchy-Riemann equations, which should be renamed, for historical
accuracy, the Gauss-Riemann equations.)\
Riemann took this to its next step. Instead of defining a complex
function by an equation and then investigating the implied geometrical
characteristics, Riemann showed that the geometrical characteristics of
conformal mapping defined the function independent of whatever equation
some formalist might wish to use to describe it.\
It is important to emphasize that to understand Riemann's geometric
constructions (as is also the case in constructing pedagogical
animations of economic processes), one must purge the mind of the
formalist remnants of Cartesian graphs. Riemann mappings are not graphs
that compare one linear parameter to another. Riemann mappings express a
dynamic harmonic among parameters that are themselves multiply connected
manifolds.\
Pedagogically, this becomes most clear through an animated series of
examples of Riemann's surfaces. Animated figure 1 shows the geometry of
the complex cubic function. On the left panel, an harmonic function is
depicted extending over 1/3 of a circular disk.

Using Gauss's representation, each point on the disk can be represented
by a complex number denoted by the length of a line drawn from that
point to the center of the disk, and the angle that line makes with a
given direction. (That direction is marked by the black arrow in the
animation.) Under the complex cubic transformation, each point on the
disk on the left is mapped to a point on the disk on the right by
tripling the angle it makes with the black line, and cubing the length
of the line that connects it to the center. This produces a conformal
map of the 1/3 disk on the left to the complete disk on the right. The
conformality of the mapping is expressed by the invariance of the
orthogonality of the arcs and radial lines on both sides. Further, as
Gauss and Riemann emphasized, the conformality of the mapping reflects
the preservation of a harmonic relationship between the minimum and
maximum curvatures as, for example, in the case of a electro-magnetic or
gravitational potential.\
This geometrical construction brings to the surface two ambiguities of
cubic functions that only appear when the function is extended to the
complex domain. The first, obvious ambiguity is that since the 1/3 disk
on the left maps to a complete disk on the right, what happens if the
function is extended to the other 2/3 of the disk on the left? In
animated figure 2, it is shown that when this is done, the other two
thirds are apparently mapped onto the same disk as the first 1/3.

Inversely, every point of the disk on the right maps to three distinctly
different points on the disk on the left.\
The other ambiguity that emerges is: what is the effect of the function
outside the boundary of the disk? Under Euler's knuckle-headed approach
of infinite series, the only way to know is to extend the disk a little
bit, and see what happens, and then extend it some more, and some more
......\
These ambiguities, however, are only an effect of the assumptions
embedded in the fantasy-world of Cartesian geometry. To eliminate them,
Riemann rejected Cartesianism and adopted a more advanced form of
Pythagorean sphaerics as it had been pioneered, first by Cusa, and then
by Gauss in his use of spherical mappings of curved surfaces. On the
spherical form of Riemann's surfaces, what had appeared to be unbounded,
is mapped onto a self-bounded sphere. This removes the false ambiguities
inherent in a Cartesian "fish-bowl" so that the discontinuities that
appear on the spherical surface reflect matters of principle.\
An example of this can be seen in the following series of animations. In
animated figure 3, the cubic function illustrated in figures 1 and 2 is
mapped, stereographically, onto the sphere. (Animated figure 4 shows the
conformality of this mapping.)

Now what had appeared to be infinitely far way, in the Cartesian form of
animations 1 and 2, is mapped to a single point, the north pole, which
becomes a second pivot for the rotation ascribed by the cubic function.\
Riemann resolved the indeterminancy of having one point map to three and
three points mapping to one by creating a multi-layered sphere. In this
way, those points that appeared to map onto the same place in the
Cartesian form, were mapped onto different layers (branches) of the
Riemann sphere. In our cubic example, the part of the sphere on the left
which is colored red, maps to the red layer on the right, which covers
an entire sphere. Similarly with the blue and yellow sections. The
branches of the sphere on the right are connected to each other at the
poles by what Riemann called branch points which he said should be
thought of as, "helicoids with infinitely small pitch".\
The boundaries between the branches on the left map to a single curve on
the right which, on both spheres, extends from one branch point to the
other. This curve Riemann called a branch cut across which the layers of
the sphere on the right could be connected to each other, in conformity
with their images on the left.\
In this way both spheres become continuous surfaces. But it is important
{not} to think of this construction as two different surfaces. Construct
in your mind as one idea, as Riemann instructed, one single surface
comprised of the essential characteristics of both spheres. Such a
surface cannot be visualized externally, but like all works of art, or
true ideas of science, it can be sensed in the mind as a real object of
thought. The visual representation, as depicted in these animations,
must be considered as merely two different views of the same object, and
the mapping to be a continuous transformation within that object. To
facilitate the generation of this idea, use the principle of inversion,
as in a musical composition. The mapping depicted in the animation is
just as much a mapping of the right sphere onto the left as vice versa.
Thus, to understand a complexfunction, one must also think,
simultaneously, of its inverse. The unified action and its inverse are
only separated in this visible form because of the inherent limitations
of sense-perception. Nevertheless, the cognitive powers of the mind
enable us to form the required, unified image.\
The continuity of these surfaces is illustrated in animated figure 5.

As the black curve traces its pathway on the left sphere, its image
follows a conformal path on the right. When the curve crosses the
different partitions of the left sphere, its image crosses from one
branch to another on the right. Again think of this also, inversely, as
the curve on the right being "unwound" onto the surface on the left.\
The different branches of the function appear in the left view as
partitions of a single sphere, while in the right view they appear as
different layers over an entire sphere. Any action in a part of the left
sphere, maps to an action on the same branch of the right. If an action
crosses from one branch to another on the left, its image crosses to the
same branches on the right, and vice versa.\
In this way, the Riemann spherical mapping can express a complex
function as an advanced form of the Pythagorean-Keplerian harmonic
division of a surface.\
On the layered sphere every point will correspond to other points on
different layers that are directly above or below it. These points will
each be an image of distinct point on the sphere on the left. Gauss
called such points {congruent, i.e., harmonic} to each other, relative
to the modulus of the function. In our example of the cubic function,
that modulus is 2Pi/3, because a rotation by that angle will exactly map
each branch onto another. Further, as is the case for all algebraic
functions, this modulus has a finite periodicity. In our example, one
rotation of 2Pi/3 will map the red part to the blue and the blue to the
yellow and the yellow to the red. A second rotation will map the red to
the yellow, the blue to the red and the yellow to the blue, and so on.
But, after three such rotations, the process only repeats itself.\
Further, the divisions into three branches (for the case of the cubic
function) is independent of the particular position of the branch-cuts.
It is the nature of the cubic function to generate a harmonic division
with three branches, in the same way that the uniqueness of the regular
spherical solids is independent of the positions of the polygons on the
spherical surface. The former is a function only of the harmonic
characteristics of the sphere, not of position on the sphere. This is a
characteristic of what Riemann adopted from Leibniz as "analysis
situs".\
Riemann called this characteristic the {modulus of periodicity}, which
implicitly defines a new type of function, which he and Gauss called,
{modular functions}. The characteristics of this modular function are
defined by the way the branch points, singularities and branches fit
together harmonically. For Riemann, this characteristic of analysis
situs {defines} the function, not any explicit algebraic formula.\
To illustrate this look at animated figures 6, 7, 8, which show the
change in the Riemann's surface corresponding to a change in the
algebraic formula from w=z\^3 to w=1-z\^3.

The change in the algebraic formula has the geometric effect of moving
the roots of the function from one point (the south pole in the first
case) to three different points (all located on the equator) in the
second case. Though this change produces a slight variation in the
effect on the sphere on the right, the analysis situs, i.e., the modulus
of periodicity, the number of branch points and branch-cuts, does not
change. The harmonic relationships expressed by the modularity of the
function are essentially the same.\
Animated figure 9 illustrates the Riemann sphere for a different
algebraic function with an added singularity--a pole.

This results in an harmonic division that divides the left sphere into
four quadrants. Each quadrant maps to an entire layer of the sphere on
the right. But as the animation illustrates, because of the presence of
the pole, the two quadrants in the "southern" hemisphere on the left are
mapped from the "north" pole southward, on the right. This effect is
reversed in the mappings of the left sphere's "northern" quadrants.\
The further effect of the analysis situs can be seen in animated figure
10.

A pathway around the south pole on the left maps to a pathway around the
north pole on the right, and, because the pathway on the left crosses
two quadrants, its image produces a doubling of the rotation in its
image on the right. In animated figure 11, a pathway around a branch
point where all four quadrants come together, still produces only a
doubling of the rotation on the right.

This is because the pathway on the left only spends one-fourth of its
rotation in each quadrant.\
This harmonic relationship is associated with a change in the
characteristic of the associated modular function. For the example just
illustrated, that modular function must express two actions.: One that
rotates the sphere by 180 degrees and the other that inverts the
northern and southern hemispheres. As in our previous example a finite
combination of these actions, along with the characteristics of the
branch points, defines the totality of the action expressed by the
function.\
But these are only the Riemann surfaces for algebraic functions. The fun
only really begins with the transcendental functions. In what follows we
will be greatly aided by Riemann's direction and investigate these
functions from the standpoint of analysis situs freed from the illusions
inherent in an algebraic formula.\
The simplest transcendentals, as Cusa and Leibniz demonstrated, are the
higher species from which all the lower algebraic functions are derived.
This characteristic emerges clearly from the standpoint of Riemann's
surfaces as a fundamental shift in the nature of the associated modular
function. As we just illustrated, the modular function associated with
the algebraic species divides the entire self-bounded surface of the
sphere into a finite number of parts, which by a finite number of
rotations, or inversions, can completely describe the harmonic
relationships of the function.\
However, the transcendental functions, when expressed by the associated
Riemann surfaces, are characterized by a harmonic relationship that
divides the sphere into an infinite number of parts.\
This is a manifestation of Gauss's assertion that the transcendental has
its true source in the infinite. But as the following examples will
illustrate, that source cannot be depicted by the undifferentiated
endless blah of Aristotle's, Descartes' or Euler's infinite. Rather it
must be thought of as the domain of increasing perfectability which
Plato, Cusa and Leibniz ascribed to the actual universe. As Leibniz put
it in his {Discourse on Metaphysics}:

"God has chosen the most perfect world, that is, the one which is at the
same time simplest in hypotheses and the richest in phenomena, as might
be a line in geometry whose construction is easy and whose properties
and effects are extremely remarkable and widespread."

Thus to understand this domain of the transcendental functions we must
proceed with Riemann's method, that is we must investigate those
functions from the standpoint of analysis situs, {not} algebraic
formulas.\
Begin this stage with an investigation of the complex
logarithmic-exponential which is the function that expresses the
relationship between the arithmetic and geometric. As we illustrated in
previous installments in this series, these simple transcendentals are
simply-periodic. (See Riemann for Anti-Dummies Part 62.)\
The Riemann surface for such a simply-periodic function is illustrated
in animated figure 12.

The different colored segments of the left sphere are conformally mapped
to a branch that covers an entire sphere on the right. And as is evident
from the animation, the number of segments of the left sphere is
infinite. Thus, the Riemann surface for the complex exponential divides
the left sphere into an ifinite number of segments and produces a sphere
on the right with an infinite number of layers.\
Animated figure 13 shows this same mapping with the sphere on the left
projected down onto a plane.

Here one can see each layer of the sphere on the right is mapped onto a
strip on the left. That strip is bounded in the vertical direction, but
is infinite in the horizontal directon.\
This harmonic division, generated by the complex exponential, defines an
entirely different type of modular function. The modulus of periodicity
is finite (i\*2Pi) but the periodicity of the modulus is infinite!\
But the logarithmic-exponential is only the first, and simplest species
of transcendental. As Gauss emphasized, the elliptical transcendentals
are an entirely different species. As we discussed in previous
installments of this series, these transcendental functions arise when
two transcendental actions are acting together to produce a single
effect. The simplest examples are the case of the elliptical orbit, in
which the double incommensurability of the arc with the sine and the arc
with the angle combine to produce the unified non-uniform elliptical
motion and the simple circular pendulum. As Riemann and Gauss emphasized
the distinguishing characteristic of elliptical functions is their
double-periodicity. (See Riemann for Anti-Dummies Parts 62 and 63.)\
Here again Euler's fraud is exposed. Both the simple and elliptical
transcendentals can be given an infinite expression in terms of Euler's
formal construction of the hypergeometric series. But from the
standpoint of the harmonic relationships that emerge with the relevant
Riemann's surfaces, it can be shown that the "infinite" from which these
two transcendentals arise is not the same.\
Animated figure 14 begins to illustrate this.

Since the elliptical function is doubly periodic, it appears on the
Riemann surface as a mapping of a doubly bounded parallelogram on the
left sphere to a layer covering the entire right sphere. To show that
this mapping is conformal and harmonic, this animation shows the
orthogonal green and white curves on the left being mapped to a set of
orthogonal periodic curves on the right. In the subsequent animations,
only one set of these curves is shown in order to make the animation
more visually intelligible.\
Animated figure 15 illustrates that there are an infinite number of
parallelograms on the left sphere, each of which constitutes an entire
branch of the function and thus maps to a layer on the right sphere that
covers the entire sphere.

Animated figure 16 shows the same function with the branches of the
sphere on the left projected onto a plane.

Thus the branches of the elliptical functions are doubly bounded
parallelograms, producing an infinite harmonic division of the sphere.
This harmonic division has a greater density of branches than the
infinite strips of the simply periodic simple transcendentals.\
What becomes even more evident from the standpoint of Riemann's
surfaces, and most relevant for understanding the more universal
epistemological implications of Riemann's ideas, is that the elliptical
modular function expresses a greater density of singularities than the
simple transcendentals.\
This increased density of singularities is brought to light when we
trace the pathways of the Riemann surface that go from zero to the
infinite. This is illustrated in animated figure 17.

In the figure, the elliptical period parallelograms are outlined in
white, and are drawn so that their corners correspond to the points
which map to the south pole (zero) on the right sphere. Here we see on
the left, orthogonal lines emanating from a corner where the
parallelograms meet, and extending to a point near the center of the
period parallelogram. The images of these lines, on the right sphere, go
from the south pole to the north (from zero to the infinite) and there
are four distinct directions. Animated figure 18 shows this same mapping
with the left sphere projected onto a plane.

Animated figures 18a and 18b show these paths to the poles with the
period parallelograms drawn so that the center of the parallelogram
corresponds to zero and the corners correspond to the poles.

Figure 18c shows a surface representation where each pole has both a
positive and negative direction.

Thus, in the elliptical transcendental, each branch of the function
contains a pole, and since there are four paths to each pole, this pole
has double the effect on the mapping of the simple poles of the sphere.
Riemann denoted this as a pole of the second degree. What is most
important to emphasize, is that the modular function associated with the
elliptical transcendentals has a greater density of singularities than
is possible for the simple transcendentals.\
Because of this doubly periodic nature of these elliptical functions and
the associated greater power of its poles, Riemann insisted the
geometrical structure of these functions did not conform to the simple
spherical action, and could only be competently mapped onto a torus.
Animated figures 19 and 20 show that the intrinsic geometry of the torus
is congruent with this double periodicity elliptical functions.

Riemann continued these investigations beyond the elliptical case and
into the domain of the hyper-elliptical or, Abelian functions. When
these functions are expressed by Riemann's surfaces and their associated
modular functions. It becomes clear that each higher species of
transcendental function is characterized by a harmonic division with a
greater density of singularities. We will have to leave to future
installments a further investigation into the anyalsis situs of these
higher transcendentals, but you can already glimpse its nature from
figure 21 which shows a sketch by Gauss of the modular harmonics
associated with the next highest transcendental.

Looking back from the standpoint of the richness of Gauss's and
Riemann's ideas, it is a wonder why anyone would allow themselves to be
enslaved by the sophistry of Euler's infinitely boring calculations.
:::

::: {.addtoany_share_save_container .addtoany_content_bottom}
::: {.a2a_kit .a2a_kit_size_32 .addtoany_list a2a-url="http://lymcanada.org/64/" a2a-title="Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 64 :  Hypergeometric Harmonics"}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F64%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2064%20%3A%20%20Hypergeometric%20Harmonics "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F64%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2064%20%3A%20%20Hypergeometric%20Harmonics "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/google_plus?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F64%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2064%20%3A%20%20Hypergeometric%20Harmonics "Google+"){.a2a_button_google_plus}
[](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd .addtoany_share_save}
:::
:::
:::

[ [ Posted on ]{.screen-reader-text} [February 20, 2010 February 24,
2019](http://lymcanada.org/64/) ]{.posted-on} [ [ [ Author
]{.screen-reader-text} [Bruce
Director](http://lymcanada.org/author/bdirector/){.url .fn .n} ]{.author
.vcard} ]{.byline} [ [ Categories ]{.screen-reader-text}
[EN](http://lymcanada.org/category/en/) , [Riemmann for
Anti-Dummies](http://lymcanada.org/category/science-1/c132-riemmann-for-anti-dummies/)
]{.cat-links}
