::: post-thumbnail
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.attachment-post-thumbnail
.size-post-thumbnail .wp-post-image width="720" height="480"
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_riemann65_afigure001-riemann65.gif"}

\<img width=\"720\" height=\"480\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_riemann65_afigure001-riemann65.gif\"
class=\"attachment-post-thumbnail size-post-thumbnail wp-post-image\"
alt=\"\" />
:::

::: entry-header
# Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 65 : On the 375th Anniversary of Kepler {#riemann-for-anti-dummies-part-65-on-the-375th-anniversary-of-kepler .entry-title}
:::

::: entry-content
::: pf-content
November 16, 2005

## On the 375 ^th^ Anniversary of Kepler's Passing

by Bruce Director

"In anxious and uncertain times like ours, when it is difficult to find
pleasure in humanity and the course of human affairs, it is particularly
consoling to think of the serene greatness of a Kepler. Kepler lived in
an age in which the reign of law in nature was by no means an accepted
certainty. How great must his faith in a uniform law have been, to have
given him the strength to devote ten years of hard and patient work to
the empirical investigation of the movement of the planets and the
mathematical laws of that movement, entirely on his own, supported by no
one and understood by very few! If we would honor his memory worthily,
we must get as clear a picture as we can of his problem and the stages
of its solution." [ ]{#more-1007}

These were the words that Albert Einstein published in the Frankfurter
Allgemeine Zeitung on November 9, 1930, for the commemoration of the 300
^th^ anniversary of Kepler's death. Now, seventy-five years later, these
words still ring true, and they provide a suitable vantage-point from
which to investigate what is as relevant today as it was then: the
connection between epistemology and the general condition of mankind.

There is an ironical benefit in exploring this connection from the
perspective of Einstein's view of Kepler. Though Einstein recognized the
importance of the connection between the state of science and the state
of society, he failed to grasp its deeper *epistemological* implications
as Kepler had. Yet the problems that Einstein faced persist unresolved
to this day. Thus, by viewing Kepler from Einstein's eyes and Einstein
from Kepler's, we can apply Kepler's approach to the problems Einstein
identified.

The world in November 1930 was indeed an "anxious and uncertain time",
as Einstein remarked. A global depression was deepening, while the
London-centered international synarchist financiers were rapidly
consolidating fascist control over the governments of Europe and Japan,
with the intention of striking at the United States, and establishing a
global, neo-feudalist, fascist world empire. As Lyndon H. LaRouche has
elaborated in many locations, most recently in *Globalism Is The New
Imperialism,* this crisis was rooted in the British imperialist reaction
to the defeat of their puppet Confederate States of America, and the
subsequent spread of the American System to continental Europe and
significant parts of Asia by Abraham Lincoln's allies. Adopting a
strategy similar to that used by their ancient Persian and Babylonian
ancestors after failing to militarily defeat Athens and her allies in
the fifth century B.C., the British-centered imperialists switched from
a primarily military strategy to destroy the American system, to one of
seeking to subvert the cultural dominance of the scientific principles
on which that system was based.

These efforts had their greatest effect in Europe. In the aftermath of
the American Revolution, the British had orchestrated the Jacobin
Revolution, the Napoleonic dictatorship and the 1815 Congress of Vienna,
which had spread a wave of enforced cultural pessimism intended to
demoralize Europe's American allies, and to destroy the optimism
generated by the success of the American cause. With the resurgence of
pro-American system reforms on the European continent in the second half
of the nineteenth century, the oligarchy accelerated the spread of this
cultural pessimism, typified by the increasing popular acceptance of
such mind-deadening cultural movements as the existentialism of
Friedrich Nietzsche and Richard Wagner's cult-operas.

In science, such cultural pessimism was expressed by attacks on the
Leibnizian tradition of Gauss, Dirichlet, Riemann et al., exemplified by
the swindles of Napoleon's favorite mathematician, Lagrange, the popular
acceptance of British-centered empiricism, associated with Maxwell, Lord
Kelvin, et al., and the reassertion of Cartesian formalism by Cauchy. By
Einstein's time, this degeneration in science manifested itself most
prominently in the more radical forms of irrationality expressed by the
Copenhagen interpretation of quantum phenomena.

Though Einstein had stubbornly resisted the introduction of such radical
positivism into science, he had been politically targeted by the
liberal-imperialist wing of these London-based synarchists. Playing on
his political naivete and his vulnerability to cultural pessimism, they
sought, sometimes successfully and sometimes not, to manipulate a
politically unsophisticated Einstein for their own ends. As a result,
Einstein was confused about the true cause of the global anxiety to
which he referred, and mystified as to its solution. Nevertheless, he
recognized that the degeneration of society that he was witnessing
coincided with a similar degeneration in science, of which he had a more
clear, albeit incomplete, conception.

It is not surprising that Einstein would find a kindred spirit in
Kepler, whose understanding of the problems confronting science and
society was much deeper than his own. In Kepler's time, irrationality
also dominated European society, despite the previously higher level of
sanity that had been initiated by the circles associated with Nicholas
of Cusa, nearly two centuries earlier. At that time, these humanists had
seized the opportunity afforded them by the collapse of the feudalist
Bardi and Peruzzi banking houses, to assert, as a principle in society,
the Socratic concept of man. Cusa insisted, as Socrates and Plato had,
that cognition, though unique to human beings in a self-conscious form,
reflects a general characteristic of the Universe itself. Thus, contrary
to the Aristotelean dogma that had dominated Europe since the collapse
of Greek society in the centuries following the Peloponnesian Wars, Cusa
understood, like Socrates and Plato, *that the material universe is not
indifferent to human thought, but that man, through his power to
discover universal physical principles, is integral to the
self-development of the Universe as a whole* .

Cusa went further, specifying that the organization of human affairs
must be based on a recognition of the role of the human mind in the
physical world. His circles were able to establish a foothold in
society, exemplified by the achievements in science and art of
Brunelleschi, DaVinci, Pacioli, and the improvements in society created
by the establishment of the first nation-states in Louis XI's France and
Henry VII's England.

In reaction, the Venetian-centered financiers, heirs to the traditions
of Imperial Rome, sought desperately to re-establish feudal control over
Europe by weakening the optimistic concept of man that had taken hold in
the Renaissance. Beginning with the 1492 Spanish Inquisition, Venice and
her allies unleashed religious warfare throughout Europe aimed at
reintroducing a fundamentally irrational view of man and the universe as
a dominant feature of European culture. By the end of Kepler's life,
this horror was erupting into the final orgy of insanity which is today
called the Thirty Years War.

But Kepler understood that the insanity on the ground reflected an
irrational view of heaven. Astronomy in Kepler's time had degenerated
from the search for universal physical principles that had characterized
the Egyptian-Pythagorean science of Sphaerics and reverted back to the
Babylonian-Persian model, which held that Man was incapable of
discovering anything truthful about the nature of the physical world,
and consequently, must accept whatever irrational dogma the reigning
authorities preferred. This view, which shackled science to sophistry,
was designed to impute to the heavens a justification for
oligarchical-imperial forms of society.

Invoking Eratosthenes' description of the Delian problem, Kepler, like
Plato, implored his contemporaries to recognize that their false view of
the planets reflected an equally false view of themselves. The
acceptance, by scientists and society at large, of Aristotelean
doctrines, was the cause of the political and social collapse they were
experiencing. Kepler, an avowed follower of Cusa, insisted that the
governing principles of the universe were congruent with the ability of
the human mind to discover those principles. Further, the existence of
that ability was itself an indication that the characteristics of human
creativity were characteristics of the Universe as a whole. As he wrote
in his *Optics* :

Anyone who ponders this carefully will find (if he will refuse to have
recourse to faith in holy scripture) both that there is a God, founder
of all nature, and that in the very mechanics of it he had care of the
humans that were to come. For this theater of the world is so ordered
that there exist in it suitable signs by which human minds, likenesses
of God, are not only invited to study the divine works, from which they
may evaluate the founder's goodness, but also are assisted in inquiring
more deeply.

Kepler rejected the common error of Ptolemy, Copernicus and Brahe, who
remained faithful to Aristotle's dictat that the planetary orbits must
be perfectly uniform circles. Instead, Kepler adopted Cusa's view, that
change was a *beneficent* characteristic of both Man and the physical
world, and thus, *the non-uniform elliptical orbit more perfectly
expressed the self-perfectability of the Universe, than the
mathematically perfect circles* . In demonstrating from the
experimentally determined evidence that the planetary orbits were indeed
non-uniform and determining the principles governing that motion, Kepler
was demonstrating, contrary to Aristotle, that not only is the physical
universe characterized by change, but that the human mind is capable of
knowing it.

*For Kepler, the planet, as a material object, does not exist in a
purely material world, and its orbit is not governed purely by material
principles. Rather, the planet's historical and future trajectory is a
pathway through a universe in which the principles of physics, life and
cognition are each and all acting everywhere and at all times. Thus, the
principles governing planetary motion not only to guide the planet, they
guide the human mind toward their discovery. As Kepler emphasized, Mind
is a principle in the material world.*

By demonstrating that he could discover and communicate the true
principles governing planetary motion, Kepler was not only advancing
astronomy, he was asserting an optimistic concept of Man and nature in
the face of a prevailing opinion that had been induced to accept
irrationality and arbitrariness in both science and human affairs.

In Einstein's time this cultural irrationality had once again begun to
dominate science. By the end of the nineteenth century, an increasing
amount of experimental evidence, such as the photoelectric effect and
Planck's discovery of the quantization of light and heat, indicated the
existence of a fundamental change in the characteristics of physical
action between the macroscopic and microscopic domains. These
discoveries were consistent with the earlier work of Gauss, Fresnel,
Riemann, Weber, et al. who, extending Leibniz's method of the
infinitesimal calculus, had discovered microscopic principles from their
experimentally determined macroscopic effects. This led Riemann, in his
habilitation dissertation, to insist that it was scientifically unsound
to assume that the characteristics of physical action in the macroscopic
domain could be linearly extended into the very large and very small.
Instead, Riemann insisted, science must develop a dynamic notion of
physical geometry that reflected the potential for non-linear change
between these domains of action.

As Riemann stated:

Knowledge of the causal connection of phenomena is based essentially
upon the precision with which we follow them down into the infinitely
small....In the natural sciences, however, where simple fundamental
concepts are still lacking for such syntheses, one pursues phenomenon
into the spatially small, in order to perceive causal connections, just
as far as the microscope permits. Questions concerning spatial relations
of measure in the indefinitely small are therefore not useless.

In reaction, the British-empiricists tried to revive Kant and Euclid,
most notably through the work of James Clerk Maxwell, who famously
rejected Riemann's approach to physics, in favor of the neo-Euclidean
doctrine which excluded "any geometries other than our own". Thus, when
the relationship between the observed macroscopic effects of
electro-magnetism were considered in light of the growing body of
experimental evidence indicating a change in physical characteristic in
the microscopic domain, Riemann's guidance proved to be essential, which
Einstein recognized.

Among Einstein's contemporaries, however, there was a growing popularity
among scientists to "explain" these phenomena by statistical methods,
similar to those used by Ptolemy, Copernicus and Brahe. These efforts
were led by Niels Bohr, his protege, Werner Heisenberg, and Heisenberg's
first teacher, Max Born.

This positivist view insisted that because they knew of no mathematical
description of these phenomena other than statistical methods, the
universe itself must be fundamentally random. In other words, Bohr,
Heisenberg and Born et al. argued, not that they merely didn't know the
principles on which these phenomena were based, but that no such
principles existed. Since no principles existed, none could be
discovered.

Born summarized his view of the dispute in the published collection of
his correspondence with Einstein:

The basic reason for the dispute between us on the validity of
statistical laws was as follows. Einstein was firmly convinced that
physics can supply su with knowledge of the objectively existing world.
Together with many other physicists I have been gradually converted, as
a result of experiences in the field of atomic quantum phenomena, to the
point of view that this is not so. At any given moment, our knowledge of
the objective world is only a crude approximation from which, by
applying certain rules such as the probability laws of quantum
mechanics, we can predict unknown (e.g. future) conditions.

*It is important to emphasize that this view, known generally as the
Copenhagen interpretation of quantum phenomena, like Ptolemy's
astronomy, was not science. It was a post hoc cult-like belief
reflecting, and ultimately used to justify, the prevalent existentialism
associated with the drive to establish fascist forms of oligarchical
control over the world. In the tradition of the Empires of Babylon,
Persia and Rome, the London-based imperialists intention was to
undermine the successful spread of the cultural optimism associated with
the American system returning to the era of wizards and serfs.*

The axiomatic foundations of the Copenhagen school have since become so
entrenched in popular opinion, that they are accepted as doctrine even
by people who know nothing of physics as exemplified by the widespread
acceptance of the belief that the Mandevillian doctrines of free trade
reflects the, "natural order of things" *.*

Einstein, Planck and a handful of others rejected this radical
positivism, stubbornly defending causality in science throughout the
early decades of the twentieth century. In September 1926 Einstein
stated his view clearly to Born:

Quantum mechanics is certainly imposing. But an inner voice tells me
that it is not yet the real thing. The theory says a lot, but does not
really bring us any closer to the secret of the 'old one'. I, at any
rate, am convinced that *He* is not playing at dice. Waves in
3-dimensional space, whose velocity is regulated by potential energy
(for example, rubber bands)...I am working very hard at deducing the
equations of motion of material points regarded as singularities, given
the differential equation of general relativity.

Writing to Born years later, in September 1944, Einstein summed up the
view he had continued to express:

We have become Antipodean in our scientific expectations. You believe in
the God who plays dice, and I in complete law and order in a world which
objectively exists, and which I, in a wildly speculative way am trying
to capture. I firmly *believe* , but I hope that someone will discover a
more realistic way, or rather a more tangible basis than it has been my
lot to find. Even the great initial success of the quantum theory does
not make me believe in the fundamental dice-game, although I am well
aware that our younger colleagues interpret this as a consequence of
senility. No doubt the day will come when we will see whose instinctive
attitude was the correct one.

In September 1950, after his association with Kurt Goedel had improved
his historical and epistemological knowledge, Einstein wrote Born
saying:

I see from the last paragraph of your letter that you, too, take the
quantum theoretical description as incomplete (referring to an
ensemble). But you are after all convinced that no (complete) laws exist
for a complete description, according to the positivistic maxim *esse
est percipi* . Well, this is a programmatic attitude, not knowledge.
This is where our attitudes really differ. For the time being, I am
alone in my views--as Leibniz was with respect to the absolute space of
Newton's theory. There now, I've paraded my old hobby-horse once again.
But it is your own fault, because you provoked me.

But though Einstein remained stubborn in his resistance to the radical
positivism of the Copenhagen interpretation, and he spent most of his
efforts trying to develop a concept that would replace it, he was unable
to succeed for two related reasons. One, unlike Kepler and Leibniz, he
had been unable to completely rise above the prevailing cultural
pessimism reflected in the degeneration of science and society, and two,
he failed to recognize, as his contemporary Vernadsky had indicated,
*that the questions posed by experimental evidence of quantum phenomena
could not be answered in the domain of mathematical physics* . In
referring to an "objective world" in his rejection of the Copenhagen
interpretation, Einstein was tacitly accepting the Aristotelean
sophistry that the world of thought and the world of physics were
separate. Rather, these questions can only be addressed when physical
phenomena are recognized, as Kepler did, *as observed effects within a
universe in which physics, life, and thought interact in what Riemann
called a multiply-connected manifold* .

Today, the only competent way to approach these questions is from the
standpoint of the science of physical economy, as that science has been
developed by Lyndon H. LaRouche. That approach requires an understanding
of what Gauss and Riemann identified as the hypergeometric domain.

The Universe From the Inside

To begin to get an understanding of what emerged as a hypergeometric
conception of the Universe , we can start by examining the problem that
Einstein identified in his 1930 commemoration of Kepler: the
determination of the orbit of the Earth. This posed a significant
challenge because it meant determining the orbit of the Earth while on
the Earth, or more generally, determining the motions of the solar
system while moving in the solar system.

Kepler understood that any particular scientific investigation, such as
the determination of the orbit of Mars, is actually an investigation of
the Universe as a whole, not of a particular phenomenon.  Any attempt to
reduce the problem to a small set of particulars would be nothing more
than sophistry. This more general problem can be stated: *how to
determine the eternal dynamic nature of the Universe itself, from within
the temporal unfolding of that eternal dynamic?*

As Einstein wrote in his 1930 essay:

Copernicus had opened the eyes of the most intelligent to the fact that
the best way to get a clear grasp of the apparent movements of the
planets in the heavens was by regarding them as movements around the Sun
conceived as stationary. If the planets moved uniformly in a circle
around he Sun, it would have been comparatively easy to discover how
these movements must look from the earth,. Since, however, the phenomena
to be dealt with were much more complicated than that, the task was a
far harder one. The first thing to be done was to determine these
movements empirically from the observations of Tycho Brahe. Only then
did it become possible to think about discovering the general laws which
these movements satisfy.

To grasp how difficult a business it was even to find out about the
actual rotating movements, one has to realize the following. One can
never see where a planet really is at any given moment, but only in what
direction it can be seen just then from the Earth, which is itself
moving in an unknown manner around the Sun. The difficulties thus seemed
practically unsurmountable.

Kepler had to discover a way of bringing order into this chaos. To start
with , he saw that it was necessary first to try and find out about the
motion of the Earth itself.

As Einstein noted, the motion of the planets in the solar system is not
directly observable. One can only observe the relative positions of the
Sun, the planets and the fixed stars, as viewed from the Earth. The
observed changes in these relative positions are thus due to a
combination of motions. Therefore, to determine, for example as Kepler
sought to do, the motion of the planet Mars, it was first necessary to
untangle which part of the observed changes in the relative positions of
Mars, Earth, Sun and fixed stars are due to the motion of each.

Kepler had demonstrated in *The New Astronomy* , Ptolemy, Copernicus,
and Brahe all found different mathematical means to untangle these
motions. The problem for Kepler was that none of them were, or even
claimed to be, true. Kepler, following Cusa, sought to understand the
observed motions as a function of the true causes. But he could not
directly observe these causes, so he had to surpass the limitations of
sense-perception, and imagine the observed motions from a vantage point
that was accessible only through reason.

But before determining the true causes, Kepler had to know the observed
motions which also required him to surpass the limitations of
sense-perceptions. In the case of the observed motions of Mars, Kepler
had to first determine the relationship of Mars to the Earth and the
Sun. This meant knowing the motion of the Earth, which he could not
directly observe. Consequently, he had to imagine how the motion of
Earth would appear were he to observe it from Mars, whose motion he
didn't know!

His approach is detailed in *The New Astronomy* , but its outline is as
follows. From the Earth, one can observe the apparent motion of the Sun
through the zodiac over the course of a year. Kepler understood this
apparent motion of the Sun to be a reflection of the actual motion of
the Earth. The cyclical nature of this motion indicated clearly, that
the Earth's motion was a closed orbit. In this way, he could imagine how
an observer on the Sun would view the Earth.

To view the Earth from Mars was more problematic, because, unlike the
Sun, Mars was also moving. To solve the problem, Kepler began by noting
the position in the zodiac of Mars and the Sun at the unique moment when
the Sun, Earth and Mars are in a direct line with each other. (See
Figure 1.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure001-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure001-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

This configuration is called opposition, which most recently occurred on
November 7, 2005. At this moment an observer on the Earth will see Mars
at a certain place in the zodiac, and an observer on Mars would see both
the Earth and the Sun at a place in the zodiac directly opposite the
position of Mars.

At some point following this observation (historical observation had
determined that this period was 687 Earth days), Mars will return to the
same position in its orbit as when it had previously been in opposition
with the Earth and the Sun. But, the Earth will be in a different place
in its orbit, and because of this, Mars will be observed in a different
place in the zodiac! (See Figure 2.)

![](){height="480" width="720"}

Nevertheless, an observer on Mars would now observe the Sun in the same
place in the zodiac as it had been 687 Earth days earlier. But, he would
see a change in the Earth's position in the zodiac between the two
periods. These observations form a triangle among the Earth, Sun and
Mars, whose base is the direct line formed by the three objects at the
first opposition, and whose legs are formed by the lines of sight from
the Earth to Mars and the Earth to the Sun at this new position of the
Earth. By comparing the observations from these three vantage points,
Kepler could determine the angles of this triangle. By repeating this
calculation, using Tycho Brahe's extensive twenty year record of
observations, Kepler was able to determine a precise orbit of the Earth.
(See Figure 3.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure003-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure003-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

Having determined the orbit of the Earth, Kepler then turned to
determining the orbit of Mars. The extensive record of Kepler's
discovery is detailed in *The New Astronomy* to which the reader is
referred, but there is one point that is crucial to emphasize for what
will follow.

After Kepler determined the size of the Earth's orbit and its eccentric
position relative to the Sun, he found that Mars's orbit was also
eccentric relative to the Sun. His first assumption for the orbits of
both Mars and Earth was that both orbits were circular. For the Earth,
this served as a successful approximation because the Earth's
eccentricity is quite small. However, for Mars, the eccentricity
deviated from pure circularity by a significant amount. Kepler
discovered this by testing the observed positions of Mars against the
geometrical characteristics of a circle: specifically, that three
distinct positions are sufficient to determine a unique circle. Under
this assumption, any three observed positions of Mars would lie on the
same circle. But, after testing 79 sets of three observations each and
found that each set of three lay on a different circle. Kepler then
realized that he was not dealing with a circular orbit and after much
work, he showed that this orbit was an ellipse, with the Sun at one of
the foci.

Untangling the Shadows

As noted above, in seeking to determine the orbit of Mars, Kepler was
seeking to determine the nature of the Universe as a whole; *a Universe
that would produce a solar system with an Earth that had come to be
dominated by life and inhabited by cognitive human beings who were
discovering its principles* .

Kepler realized that to investigate these deeper principles through
astronomy, he had to also investigate the process by which he was
investigating. Just as he had to determine the motions of the solar
system from inside the solar system, to determine the underlying nature
of the Universe, he had to form a self-conscious conception of the role
of his own mind in the development of that Universe. This meant that he
had to investigate: *the connection between the physical parts of the
Universe, the interaction of those physical parts with his senses, the
interaction of those sense perceptions with his mind, and the
interaction of his mind with the Universe as a whole* .

He recognized that since all astronomical observations result from an
interaction of light and the human eye, knowing the principles of light
and vision would provide a link to the connection between the cognitive
and physical domains. As he wrote in the introduction of his *Optics* :

What wonder, then, if that principle of all adornment in the world,
which the divine Moses introduced immediately on the first day into
barely created matter, as a sort of instrument of the Creator, for
giving form and growth to everything--if, I say, this principle, the
most excellent thing in the whole corporeal world, the matrix of the
animate faculties, and the chain linking the corporeal and spiritual
world, has passed over into the same laws by which the world was to be
furnished.

In the *Optics* , Kepler elaborates that this coherence between the laws
of physics and cognition is reflected by expression of the elliptical
planetary orbits and the characteristics of light and vision as special
cases of a single conception of a conical function.

It is important here to dispel the popular myth that is repeated in
virtually every high school and university mathematics department today.
Today's mathematicians, being the artful dodgers they are, insist that
the Greeks investigated the conic sections only for their mathematical
purity, without any regard for their significance in the physical world.
Thus, these sophists maintain that, when Kepler discovered the
elliptical nature of planetary orbits, it was a complete surprise, and
incidental to the purely mathematical concerns of the Greeks.

Nothing could be farther from the truth. The Greek investigation of the
conic sections arose out of the Pythagorean investigations of the
problem of doubling the cube. As Plato states in the *Timaeus* , this
was an investigation of the characteristics of the physical universe,
the way these physical characteristics are truthfully reflected in the
human mind, *and* , the interaction of the human mind with the Universe
as a whole. Thus, Kepler's discovery that the planetary orbits expressed
another form of the same conical function, was not only not accidental,
it was not a surprise, except to today's mathematicians.

Further, when Kepler discovered the planetary manifestation of conic
sections, he also understood this to be of universal significance,
indicating, as did Archytas's construction for the doubling of the cube
by torus, cylinder and cone, that the characteristic of action in the
physical universe is not simply spherical, but is of a higher type--a
type that Gauss and Riemann would later call hypergeometric.

That higher type of hypergeometry begins to emerge through an
investigation of the general form of a single conical function, from
which the elliptical orbits and the doubling of the cube are physical
manifestations. In his *Optics* , Kepler investigated this conical
function from the standpoint of light and vision.

From one perspective, the conic sections can be generated by the motion
of a plane cutting a cone. (see Figure 4.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure004-riemann65.gif"
height="700" width="430"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure004-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"700\" width=\"430\" />

However, if viewed as a projection onto a surface, a mathematical
discontinuity appears, in the transition from the region of elliptical
action to the region of the hyperbolic. (See Figures 5a-b.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure005a-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="686"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure005a-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"686\" />

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure005b-riemann65.gif"
height="322" width="500"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure005b-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"322\" width=\"500\" />

As Kepler describes it:

Speaking analogically rather than geometrically, there exists among
these lines the following order, by reason of their properties: it
passes from the straight line through an infinity of hyperbolas to the
parabola, and thence through an infinity of ellipses to the circle. For
the most obtuse of all hyperbolas is a straight line; the most acute, a
parabola. Likewise, the most acute of all ellipses is a parabola; the
most obtuse, a circle. Thus the parabola has on one side two things
infinite in nature--the hyperbola and the straight line--and on the
other side two things that are finite and return to themselves--the
ellipse and the circle. It itself holds itself in the middle place, with
a middle nature. For it is also infinite, but assumes a limitation from
the other side, for the more it is extended, the more it becomes
parallel to itself, and does not expand its arms (so to speak) like a
hyperbola, but draws back from the embrace of the infinite, always
seeking less although it always embraces more. With the hyperbola, the
more is actually embraced between the arms, the more it also seeks.
Therefore, the opposite limits are the circle and the straight line: the
former is pure curvedness, the latter pure straightness. The hyperbola,
parabola, and ellipse are placed in between, and participate in the
straight and the curved, the parabola equally, the hyperbola in more of
the straightness, and the ellipse in more of the curvedness.

Kepler further showed that the epistemological implications that the
planetary orbits are elliptical, is not only expressed in relationship
to light and vision. Most notably in his *Harmonies of the World* , he
demonstrated the congruence between the relationships of the determining
minimum and maximum speeds among the elliptical orbits, and the
relationships of well-tempered polyphony that J.S. Bach subsequently
developed through his compositions. Here again, a discontinuity appeared
that had a physical significance. Specifically, the existence of the
Lydian intervals formed between the orbits of both Mars and Jupiter and
the yet to be discovered asteroid belt! This physical discontinuity as a
point of change (a type of register shift), is also reflected in the
difference in the physical nature of the planets that inhabit different
sides of this discontinuity. This harmonic relationship, and the
accompanying discontinuity are hereditary reflections of the
harmonically organized plasma disk from which the solar system
developed.

The subsequent discovery of the hyperbolic orbits of comets, and Gauss's
determination of the orbit of the asteroid Ceres, showed that Kepler's
understanding that the elliptical orbits are a special case of a more
general conical function, was correct. This generalized understanding of
Kepler's astronomy was summarized by Gauss in his *Theory of the Motions
of the Heavenly Bodies Moving About the Sun in Conic Sections* .

Gauss, and his student Riemann, went still further, specifying that
Kepler's general conical function was itself a special case of a more
general, higher, hypergeometric, or hyper-conical function. These
hypergeometric functions expressed, not the characteristics of the solar
system per se, but the form of the universal characteristics that
generated the characteristics of the solar system.

The Non-Infinite Universe

In locating the conical functions from the standpoint of a unified
conception of the physical, biological, and cognitive domains of
astronomy, Kepler was advancing the process, begun by Cusa, of returning
science to the higher conceptions of the ante-Euclidean Greeks, and
presaging the later achievements of Kaestner, Gauss and Riemann. This
meant purging science of the pernicious effects of the slavish
acceptance of Euclidean geometry.

A crucial point of attack for Cusa and Kepler was to demolish the false
and arbitrary Aristotelean concept of the mathematical infinite
enshrined in Euclid's Elements.            If space were as Euclid
claimed--infinitely-extended in three rectilinear directions--only
uniform circular or rectilinear motion would be possible. In such a
fantasy world, the experimentally determined non-uniform elliptical
orbits could only exist as arbitrary aberrations in a world that was
assumed not to change.

As Abraham Kaestner later stated, the formal validity of Euclidean
geometry rises or falls on the acceptance of the parallel postulate.
Euclid was so aware of this vulnerability that he did not directly
mention infinity in its statement, and he cited the parallel postulate
only sparingly in the proofs of the theorems that follow. Nevertheless,
as Kaestner and Gauss both underscored, without the assumption of the
parallel postulate, there are no similar triangles, and without similar
triangles, the entire edifice of Euclidean geometry crumbles. Gauss went
further than Kaestner, emphasizing that the parallel postulate could
only be true if one assumed that the curvature of physical space were
zero-- a fact which could only be determined by physical measurement,
not by the mathematical formalism of Euclidean geometry.

From a subjective standpoint, the belief in a physical reality for
Euclidean geometry requires the acceptance of Kant's axiom that the
human mind must be virtually hard-wired to think of the Universe in
Euclidean terms. However, such ancient demonstrations as Archytas's
proof that doubling the "Euclidean" cube depends on a higher conical
function, already demonstrates that Kant's reverence for Euclidean
geometry is false. Kepler's projective construction of the conical
sections, provides a further demonstration that such a Kantian view is
completely illusory.

In Kepler's construction, the infinite appears, not as an unreachable,
indefinite magnitude, but as *a point of change--a transition between
the elliptical and hyperbolic domains of action joined by a single
conical function.* *Thus, from Kepler's standpoint, the infinite is in
the middle, not at the end, of a non-infinite self-bounded manifold* .

The experimental and epistemological arguments for such a concept of a
non-infinite Universe were already presented by Plato in the *Timaeus* .
Cusa and Kepler revived and extended these discussions in many
locations. In his *On Learned Ignorance* , Cusa emphasized that the
apparently infinite emerges in the "unfolded" form of a self-bounded,
"enfolded" Universe. In the unfolded form, opposites, such as the
minimum and maximum appear different, but in the enfolded form, such
opposites coincide. In 1610, Kepler stated a physical argument for
Cusa's self-bounded conception: if the Universe were infinite, the night
sky would not be dark but would be filled with light from an infinite
number of stars. This paradox is today associated with Gauss's close
collaborator, William Olbers, who, nearly two hundred years later
restated it as a direct argument against Kant.

In his habilitation dissertation, Riemann also stated the case for a
non-infinite Universe:

When constructions in space are extended into the immeasurably great,
unlimitedness must be distinguished from infiniteness; the one belongs
to relations of extension, the other to those of measure. That space is
an unlimited, triply extended manifold is an assumption applied in every
conception of the external world; by it at every moment the domain of
real perceptions is supplemented and the possible locations of an object
that is sought for are constructed, and in these applications the
assumption is continually being verified. The unlimitedness of space has
therefore a greater certainty, empirically, than any experience of the
external. From this, however, follows in no wise its infiniteness, but
on the contrary space would necessarily be finite, if one assumes that
bodies are independent of situation and so ascribes to space a constant
measure of curvature, provided this measure of curvature had any
positive value however small.

As Cusa emphasized, this *anti-Euclidean* notion of a self-bounded
Universe, conforms to the nature of both the physical world *and Man* .
Like the physical world, man's life is finite but unbounded. It begins
at birth and ends at death. From this standpoint of mortality, the world
before birth and the world after death, appear to be infinitely far way.
But that finite life, through the transmission of creative discoveries
through culture, affects, and is affected by, what precedes and follows
it. The apparently infinite domains, beyond the temporal limits, are not
outside one's mortal life, but at the center of it. *Thus, to believe in
a Euclidean geometry is to reject the immortality of the human soul* .

Cusa's and Kepler's annulment of Euclidean geometry set the stage for
the development of a new, physically determined concept of a
non-infinite geometry. The first steps taken in that direction are due
to the work of Girard Desargues (1593-1662) who junked Euclidean
geometry in favor of Kepler's notion of projective relationships, thus,
banning the Aristotelean concept of the infinite completely from
science.

A simple experiment can be performed to illustrate Desargues' method.
Draw a large rectangle on a whiteboard. The opposite sides of the
rectangle would appear, from the assumptions of Euclidean geometry, to
be parallel, and thus never meet, even if infinitely extended. Now take
a transparent pane of plexiglass and tilt it at an angle to the plane of
the whiteboard. With one eye closed, trace the outline of the rectangle
onto the plexiglass. This action produces a conical projection of the
whiteboard onto the plane of the plexiglass, with the eye as the apex of
the cone. Under this projection, the images of the opposite sides of the
rectangle, that appeared to be parallel on the whiteboard, now intersect
on the plexiglass. *Thus, with a turn of the head, the infinite is
brought into the finite!*

In this way, Desargues began to generalize Kepler's elaboration of
Cusa's idea of a non-infinite Universe producing many important
discoveries that are crucial for the later development of science, one
of which is particularly important for our argument here.

Desargues showed that, though under projection lengths, proportions of
lengths and angles are, in general, changed, there is one characteristic
that remains invariant. Later called the cross-ratio, this
characteristic is the ratio of two ratios formed among four arbitrary
points. (See Figure 6.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure006-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure006-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

Since the conic sections are in a projective relationship to each other,
the invariance of the cross-ratio is a characteristic of the conical
function. (See Figure 7.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure007-riemann65.png"
height="600" width="900"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure007-riemann65.png\"
alt=\"\" height=\"600\" width=\"900\" />

A further illustration of this same principle can be taken from another
discovery of Desargues--the complete quadrilateral. Desargues proved
that the intersections of the extended sides and diagonals of an
arbitrary quadrilateral form a projective configuration in which the
cross ratios are preserved. (See Figure 8.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure008-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure008-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

This type of cross ratio is a special case, called harmonic, because B
divides segment AC in the same proportion that C divides AD. If one now
looks at the complete quadrilateral dynamically, and imagines, in the
tradition of Kepler, that point D moves off towards the infinite in one
direction, the position of points A, B and C must also move in order to
maintain the harmonic relationship among all four points. This motion
will also change the angles of the quadrilateral. (See Figure 9.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure009-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure009-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

When the sides of the quadrilateral become parallel, point D reaches the
infinite, or, inversely, when D reaches the infinite, the sides of the
quadrilateral become parallel. At this point, the harmonic cross ratio
with points A, B and C is still maintained. (See Figure 10.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure010-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure010-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

If we now tilt the sides of the quadrilateral a little more, point D
appears to return from the infinite on the other side of point A, all
the while maintaining the harmonic proportions with points A, B, and C. 
(See Figure 11.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure011-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure011-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

From the standpoint of Euclidean geometry, the harmonic characteristic
of the complete quadrilateral seems mystical, because in Euclidean
geometry, the infinite can have no effect on the finite. But as
Desargues' construction demonstrates, the "infinite" in the complete
quadrilateral, is, as in Kepler's projective conics, a single point of
change, which maintains an harmonic relationship to the finite parts,
just as any "finite" point does. This type of paradox confronts the
dilemma of Euclidean sophists: either, maintain Euclidean geometry and
insist that the harmonic characteristics of the complete quadrilateral
are magic, or, recognize, as Kepler did, that the experimental evidence
that physical principles express such harmonic relationships, and admit
that Euclidean geometry is a fraud.

The complete quadrilateral also illustrates an early expression of what
would later be called by Riemann, "Dirichlet's Principle". There is a
single connected relationship among the position of points A, B, C and
D, and the angles and lengths of the sides and diagonals of the
quadrilateral. This relationship is an effect of the harmonic principle
reflected by the invariance of the cross-ratio. It is this harmonic
principle that is primary. The positions of the visible objects are a
function of that harmonic principle.

The harmonic relationship exists, even if one of the points appears to
be infinitely far away because the point at infinity is not outside the
process, but within it. What appears to be infinite is merely a point of
change, within an otherwise non-infinite self-bounded manifold.

*The complete quadrilateral, and Kepler's conics cannot exist in a
Euclidean infinitely-extended space, but only in a Cusan-Keplerian
non-infinite self-bounded manifold. In such a manifold, change is an
essential characteristic and what appears to be mathematically infinite
is understood as an expression of that change.*

The Road to the Hyper-conical

After Desargues' the nature and physical expression of Kepler's conical
function was elaborated further by Blaise Pascal and Leibniz. In his
development of the infinitesimal calculus, Leibniz showed that the
conical function had three distinct but related forms: the exponential,
circular and hyperbolic. Through his collaboration with Bernoulli,
Leibniz demonstrated that the catenary is a physical expression of the
three forms of conical functions. This showed, once again, that the
physical characteristics of the Universe conformed to the
Cusan-Keplerian concept of a non-infinite self-bounded manifold.
However, already embedded in Kepler's astronomy was experimental
evidence that these conical functions must be superceded by a higher
type of *hyper-conical function* . This manifested itself in the
so-called "Kepler Problem", whose investigation led Gauss to first
discover what he called the elliptical transcendentals.

The "Kepler Problem" arose from the effort to determine the motion of a
planet in an elliptical orbit. Kepler had already shown that it was
impossible to completely describe the principle on which this motion was
based with respect to the functions of circular action. The subsequent
work of Leibniz not only confirmed this, but also indicated that the
other functions associated with conical action--the hyperbolic and
exponential--were also inadequate to describe the motion of a planet in
an elliptical orbit. As early as 1797 Gauss recognized that this was
because elliptical motion is governed by the *elliptical*
transcendentals, which are a distinct and higher form than the simple
circular, exponential and hyperbolic functions.

Subsequent to these early discoveries, Gauss continued to explore the
relationship between these two transcendental domains. One of his most
intriguing insights is expressed by his investigations of the
pentagramma mirificum. The pentagramma mirificum was originally
discovered by Kepler's contemporary John Napier in connection with his
investigations of spherical trigonometry. Napier had recognized that the
self bounded nature of the sphere is reflected in the connected
relationship between the sides and angles of a spherical triangle. In
such a spherical triangle, the lengths of the sides are a function of
the angles and vice versa. In the special case of a spherical right
triangle, this relationship is expressed by the pentagramma mirificum.

Unlike a Euclidean triangle, in which the sides are measured as lengths,
in a spherical triangle, both the sides and the angles are measured as
angles. (See Figure 12.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure012-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure012-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

Napier showed that in a right spherical triangle, the three sides and
two other angles are connected to each other by a relationship between
their sines and cosines. (See Figure13.).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure013-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure013-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

The relationship among these five components can be ordered so that they
form a self-polar spherical pentagon, which Napier called, the
pentagramma mirificum. (See Figure 14.).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure014-riemann65.png"
height="746" width="900"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure014-riemann65.png\"
alt=\"\" height=\"746\" width=\"900\" />

Gauss was intrigued by the relationship of Napier's spherical pentagram
to his elliptical transcendentals. He realized that Napier's pentagramma
mirificum established that a spherical surface had an intrinsic
five-fold periodicity. He saw this five-fold periodicity in light of a
well known discovery of Apollonius that five points are required to
uniquely determine a conic section. This distinguishes the general conic
section from a circle, which requires only three points, and a line,
that requires only two. Gauss recognized that the five-fold periodicity
of the sphere and the five point determination of conics, reflected the
distinction between the higher form of elliptical transcendentals and
the lower form of transcendental associated with circular, hyperbolic
and exponential functions.

These simple transcendentals, associated with Kepler's conical function,
arise in connection with physical action characterized by a single
principle of change, such as the incommensurability between the arc and
the sine in uniform circular motion. However, the elliptical
transcendentals, as Gauss showed, are characterized by two principles of
change, exemplified in an ellipse by the double incommensurability
between the sine and the arc and the sine and the angle. A similar
*elliptical* double incommensurability appears in a *circular* pendulum
between the angle and the sine and the angle and the time.

The connection between the spherical pentagram and the elliptical
functions is illustrated by Gauss's demonstration that, when the
spherical self-polar pentagon is projected onto a plane that is tangent
to the sphere, by a cone whose apex is at the center of the sphere, a
rectilinear plane pentagon is produced. (See Figure 15. )

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure015-riemann65.png"
height="600" width="900"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure015-riemann65.png\"
alt=\"\" height=\"600\" width=\"900\" />

The five vertices of this plane pentagon define a unique ellipse. The
altitude lines of this plane pentagon all intersect at one point, which
is the image of the point of tangency of the plane to sphere. (See
Figure 16.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure016-riemann.png"
height="820" width="900"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure016-riemann.png\"
alt=\"\" height=\"820\" width=\"900\" />

Gauss showed that this characteristic is a reflection of the fact that
the vertices and opposite sides of the plane pentagon were images of
poles and equators of the spherical self-polar pentagon. (See Figure
17.).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure017-riemann65.png"
height="900" width="900"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure017-riemann65.png\"
alt=\"\" height=\"900\" width=\"900\" />

This reflected a type of "Dirichlet's Principle" in that on the sphere,
the altitude lines of the spherical pentagram can intersect at any point
inside the spherical pentagon. However, on the plane pentagon there is
only one set of altitude lines. Thus, the spherical self-polar pentagon
reflects an entire manifold of plane pentagons, each of which reflects
elliptical action. The relationship among these plane pentagons can only
be expressed by an elliptical transcendental. Thus, the spherical
pentagramma mirificum is an unfolded form of an elliptical function.

In his work on the pentagramma mirificum, Gauss then investigated this
plane pentagon inscribed in an ellipse, in light of Kepler's
determination of the position of a planet in an elliptical orbit. (See
Figure 18.).

![](){height="900" width="900"}

He showed that this relationship, between the spherical pentagon and its
projection, was expressed by his new *elliptical* transcendentals. This
fact indicated that the characteristics of spherical action were
implicitly elliptical and could not be completely characterized by
circular functions, as naive sense-perception might indicate. Inversely,
the fact that the experimental evidence demonstrated that the planetary
motion is elliptical, not circular as Aristotle dogmatically insisted,
demanded the rejection of naive notions of the sphere in favor of the
higher forms of cognition indicated by Gauss's and Riemann's
hypergeometric functions.

The Riemannian Self-Developing Domain

Just as Kepler's method, provoked by the experimentally determined
elliptical orbits, produced the concept of a non-infinite self-bounded
conical function, that same method, provoked by the "Kepler Problem",
compelled Gauss to supercede Kepler's result, (as Kepler himself
demanded) producing the concept of the higher elliptical transcendental.
However, such elliptical transcendentals are inadequate to express the
higher forms of physical action which Riemann characterized as
"multiply-connected continuous manifolds". An adequate method to
understand these types of physical action was not achieved until Riemann
unified and advanced Gauss's work on the hypergeometric functions.
Further, just as Kepler's elliptical orbits, and Gauss's investigation
of them, produced concepts of universal significance, Riemann's
investigation into physical processes governed by hypergeometric
functions, produced a greater understanding of the Universe as a whole.

That understanding was elaborated in his *Theory of Abelian Functions*
and his lectures on Gauss's hypergeometric function. In those works,
Riemann develops the power of Riemann surfaces to represent the concepts
associated with multiply-connected hypergeometric action. Since the
construction of Riemann's surfaces has been treated in detail in
previous installments of this series, we only summarize those
constructions here.

Riemann recognized that the non-infinite, self-bounded manifold
indicated by, Kepler's conical function, or Desargues projective
geometry conforms to a stereographic mapping of a plane onto a spherical
surface. This "Riemann sphere" is a non-infinite, self-bounded surface,
in which the north pole of that surface is the point of change, which is
apparently infinite in the planar form. When Kepler's conical function
is projected onto the Riemann sphere, the apparently discontinuous
conical function of Kepler beccomes a continuous function. (See Figure
19.).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure019-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="734"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure019-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"734\" />

The discontinuity between the elliptical and hyperbolic action remains,
but on the Riemann sphere it is clearly represented, not as a
Euclidean-type mathematical infinite, but as a singular point of change.
A similar construction can also be imagined for Desargues' complete
quadrilateral.

Riemann showed that the simply periodic, circular, hyperbolic, and
exponential transcendentals conform to the form of a non-infinite,
self-bounded manifold expressed by a Riemann sphere. (See Figures 20.).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure020-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure020-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

However, Gauss, Jacobi, Abel, and Riemann all showed that the doubly
periodic elliptical transcendentals, produce four points at infinity. (
See Figure 21.).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure021-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure021-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

Riemann emphasized that a non-infinite, self-bounded manifold of four
discontinuities cannot be represented in a spherical form. Rather, its
geometrical characteristics conform to the shape of a torus. (See Figure
22.).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure022-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure022-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

In continuing this investigation into the hyper-elliptical and Abelian
functions, Riemann showed that each successive gradation of
transcendental function, contained an increasing number of
discontinuities. Consequently, each increase in the number of
discontinuities is associated with a change in the characteristic
(genus) of the associated non-infinite, self-bounded manifold. (See
Figure 23.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure023-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure023-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

The geometrical representation of the change between manifolds of
different genera is consistent with the topological difference between a
sphere and a torus. That topological difference is expressed by the
ability of the manifold to admit a greater number of distinct pathways
of action. Thus, each successive species of non-infinite, self-bounded
manifold, is capable of expressing physical action of successively
greater complexity.

But just as Kepler's treatment of conic sections from a projective
standpoint revealed the underlying epistemological significance of
elliptical motion, viewing this succession of self-bounded Riemannian
manifolds in a projective form also unveils their true beauty.

Take as a starting point the simplest case: the self-bounded spherical
manifold. The projection of this manifold is expressed by the projective
relationship of Kepler and Desargues. Now, take the next case: the
self-bounded torus associated with elliptical transcendentals. Its
projective form is a parallelogram with four apparently infinite
magnitudes. (See Figure 24.).

![](){height="480" width="720"}

Consider this species of manifold, as Riemann did, as a manifold of
physical potential. In this respect, the relationships between the
orthogonal pathways of minimal and maximal change in potential, are
determined, by the four apparently infinite magnitudes. Just as the
"point at infinity" determines, for example, the harmonic
characteristics of the complete quadrilateral, the four "points at
infinity" of an elliptical transcendental determines the harmonic
characteristics of this manifold. This is expressed, for example, by the
transformation of the characteristic of the potential from a circular
boundary near the center of the manifold, into a square boundary towards
the edge.

However, we must consider the apparently infinite magnitudes in the
elliptical transcendentals, not as "infinities" but as discontinuities
within an otherwise self-bounded continuous process. In other words,
just as Kepler's conical function transformed the apparently infinite
boundary between the elliptical and hyperbolic into a discontinuity
within an otherwise continuous, self-bounded manifold, a similar means
to "continue across the infinite" must be found for the elliptical
transcendentals.

To do this, Riemann utilized a discovery of another student of Gauss,
Ferdinand Moebius who elaborating Gauss's treatment of complex
functions. Moebius investigated the characteristics of what appeared to
be the simplest type of complex functions: simple linear
transformations, of the form (a\*z+b)/(c\*z+d), where z is a variable
and a, b, c, d are arbitrary complex numbers. These Moebius
transformations play a similar role with respect to the higher
transcendental functions that the exponential functions play with
respect to Leibniz's catenary and the simple transcendentals.

Examples of simple transformations are translation, inversion, rotation,
and combinations of all three. (See Figures 25a-f).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure025a-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure025a-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure025b-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure025b-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure025c-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure025c-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure025d-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure025d-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure025e-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure025e-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure025f-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure025f-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

What Moebius discovered was that these simple types of complex
transformations are actually generalizations of Kepler's and Desargues'
projective geometry. Under these Moebius transformations, the
cross-ratio among any four complex numbers is invariant. When the
cross-ratio is a non-complex number, the four points lie either on a
circle or a line. In keeping with Cusa, a line must be considered a
circle whose center is the "point at infinity".

A unique Moebius transformation can always be found that maps any three
points to zero, one and infinity. Thus, it is most simple geometrically
to define the cross-ratio, with respect to Moebius transformations, when
three of the points forming the cross-ratio are zero, one and infinity.
On a Riemann sphere, this means the points are at the south pole, the
north pole and the equator. (See Figure 26.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure026-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure026-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

However, in the case of the elliptical transcendentals, there are four
points that map to infinity and four points that map to one.
Nevertheless, a simple set of Moebius transformations will continue this
projection across the infinite. (See Figure 27.).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure027-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure027-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

This gives us a projected image of the self-bounded torus, with a
greater density of discontinuities than in is possible in a spherical
manifold. (See Figure 28a,b.).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure028a-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure028a-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure028b-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure028b-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

For the hyper-elliptical case, the projected image of the Riemann
surface is a type of octagon with eight "points at infinity", and eight
points that map to unity. As in the case of the elliptical function,
these eight points at infinity determine the harmonic characteristics of
the manifold, but unlike the elliptical case, eight points at infinity
are associated with a change to negative curvature. A different species
of Moebius transformation continues this projection across the infinite.
Thus, the hyper-elliptic function can only exist in a negatively curved,
non-infinite, self-bounded manifold. (See Figure 29a,b.).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure029a-riemann65.gif"
height="636" width="636"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure029a-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"636\" width=\"636\" />

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure029b-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure029b-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

Such a manifold cannot be represented completely in visible space.
Therefore, we can only "observe" such a manifold as a projection onto
the cave wall of sense-perception.

However, it is important to underscore the significance of the change in
characteristic curvature between the elliptical and hyper-elliptical.
The spherical manifolds are characterized by positive curvature. The
torus combines both positive and negative curvature for a net curvature
of zero. The self-bounded manifolds of the hyper-elliptical and beyond
are characterized by negative curvature.

From this standpoint, the discontinuity that appears in Kepler's conical
function between the elliptical and hyperbolic domains takes on a new
light. It conforms to the change in characteristic between the generally
positively curved manifolds of the simple and elliptical transcendentals
to the negatively curved manifolds of the hyper-elliptic (hyperbolic)
forms.

Riemann recognized the significance of this change and suggested that
only a notion of space that encompasses all three types of curvature
could adequately represent universal principles. In his habilitation
dissertation he proposed an image for such a manifold as an intersecting
sphere, cylinder and the negatively curved inner portion of a torus.
(See Figure 30.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure030-riemann65.gif"
height="372" width="400"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure030-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"372\" width=\"400\" />

One circle lies on all three surfaces, and forms the image of visible
space.

Once again, the Euclidean plane of zero curvature does not exist, except
in the minds of Aristoteleans and fools. It is merely a limited view of
a manifold that is both positively and negatively curved. Such a
manifold, represented by the torus of Riemann's surfaces, or ,
metaphorically by, the cylinder in the above construction, is simply a
transition between the predominately positively curved domain of visible
space and the predominately negatively domain of the very large and very
small.

Thus, the Universe cannot be characterized by a single type of
curvature. Rather, it must be thought of as a dynamic process in which
all three types of curvatures are interacting.

In this way, we can form from Riemann's treatment of Abelian and
hypergeometric functions, a concept, not of a single non-infinite,
self-bounded manifold, but of a nested succession of such manifolds, a
type of manifold of manifolds. Such a manifold of manifolds, which in
Riemann's representation, begins with the simple self-bounded sphere,
continues to the torus, and then into the hyper-elliptical and higher
functions, forms a concept of the form of a non-infinite,
*self-developing* , self-bounded Universe.

A Final Look at Kepler, Riemann and Einstein

Einstein concluded his 1930 commemoration of Kepler saying:

It seems that the human mind has first to construct forms independently
before we can find them in things. Kepler's marvelous achievement is a
particularly fine example of the truth that knowledge cannot spring from
experience alone but only from the comparison of the inventions of the
intellect with observed fact.

These closing statements reflect Einstein's rejection of positivism, and
echo, albeit in a weakened form, the influence of Kepler and Riemann on
his thinking. Yet, they also point out his failing. Progress in science
depends on developing a strengthened tie to Kepler and Riemann. The
human mind does not "first construct forms independently before we can
find them in things", because it is never independent of the Universe in
which it exists. The interaction of the intellect with observed fact, is
not the interaction of two separate domains. It is an interaction which
*changes* the self-developing, multiply-connected domains of physics,
life and thought.

Kepler's marvelous achievement is a fine example of *this* type of
thinking. What is needed now, is more than simple admiration for Kepler.
What is needed is an army of new Kepler's, who, equipped with Riemann's
conceptions and LaRouche's discoveries, will do as Kepler did during
that brief interval of time that ended on this date 375 years ago:
confront the paradoxes presented by nature and find in them, a deeper
understanding of Man.

65
:::

::: {.addtoany_share_save_container .addtoany_content_bottom}
::: {.a2a_kit .a2a_kit_size_32 .addtoany_list a2a-url="http://lymcanada.org/65/" a2a-title="Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 65 :  On the 375th Anniversary of Kepler"}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F65%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2065%20%3A%20%20On%20the%20375th%20Anniversary%20of%20Kepler "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F65%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2065%20%3A%20%20On%20the%20375th%20Anniversary%20of%20Kepler "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/google_plus?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F65%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2065%20%3A%20%20On%20the%20375th%20Anniversary%20of%20Kepler "Google+"){.a2a_button_google_plus}
[](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd .addtoany_share_save}
:::
:::
:::

[ [ Posted on ]{.screen-reader-text} [February 20, 2010 February 24,
2019](http://lymcanada.org/65/) ]{.posted-on} [ [ [ Author
]{.screen-reader-text} [Bruce
Director](http://lymcanada.org/author/bdirector/){.url .fn .n} ]{.author
.vcard} ]{.byline} [ [ Categories ]{.screen-reader-text}
[EN](http://lymcanada.org/category/en/) , [Riemmann for
Anti-Dummies](http://lymcanada.org/category/science-1/c132-riemmann-for-anti-dummies/)
]{.cat-links}

::: post-thumbnail
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.attachment-post-thumbnail
.size-post-thumbnail .wp-post-image width="720" height="480"
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_riemann65_afigure001-riemann65.gif"}

\<img width=\"720\" height=\"480\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_riemann65_afigure001-riemann65.gif\"
class=\"attachment-post-thumbnail size-post-thumbnail wp-post-image\"
alt=\"\" />
:::

::: entry-header
# Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 65 : On the 375th Anniversary of Kepler {#riemann-for-anti-dummies-part-65-on-the-375th-anniversary-of-kepler-1 .entry-title}
:::

::: entry-content
::: pf-content
November 16, 2005

## On the 375 ^th^ Anniversary of Kepler's Passing

by Bruce Director

"In anxious and uncertain times like ours, when it is difficult to find
pleasure in humanity and the course of human affairs, it is particularly
consoling to think of the serene greatness of a Kepler. Kepler lived in
an age in which the reign of law in nature was by no means an accepted
certainty. How great must his faith in a uniform law have been, to have
given him the strength to devote ten years of hard and patient work to
the empirical investigation of the movement of the planets and the
mathematical laws of that movement, entirely on his own, supported by no
one and understood by very few! If we would honor his memory worthily,
we must get as clear a picture as we can of his problem and the stages
of its solution." [ ]{#more-1007}

These were the words that Albert Einstein published in the Frankfurter
Allgemeine Zeitung on November 9, 1930, for the commemoration of the 300
^th^ anniversary of Kepler's death. Now, seventy-five years later, these
words still ring true, and they provide a suitable vantage-point from
which to investigate what is as relevant today as it was then: the
connection between epistemology and the general condition of mankind.

There is an ironical benefit in exploring this connection from the
perspective of Einstein's view of Kepler. Though Einstein recognized the
importance of the connection between the state of science and the state
of society, he failed to grasp its deeper *epistemological* implications
as Kepler had. Yet the problems that Einstein faced persist unresolved
to this day. Thus, by viewing Kepler from Einstein's eyes and Einstein
from Kepler's, we can apply Kepler's approach to the problems Einstein
identified.

The world in November 1930 was indeed an "anxious and uncertain time",
as Einstein remarked. A global depression was deepening, while the
London-centered international synarchist financiers were rapidly
consolidating fascist control over the governments of Europe and Japan,
with the intention of striking at the United States, and establishing a
global, neo-feudalist, fascist world empire. As Lyndon H. LaRouche has
elaborated in many locations, most recently in *Globalism Is The New
Imperialism,* this crisis was rooted in the British imperialist reaction
to the defeat of their puppet Confederate States of America, and the
subsequent spread of the American System to continental Europe and
significant parts of Asia by Abraham Lincoln's allies. Adopting a
strategy similar to that used by their ancient Persian and Babylonian
ancestors after failing to militarily defeat Athens and her allies in
the fifth century B.C., the British-centered imperialists switched from
a primarily military strategy to destroy the American system, to one of
seeking to subvert the cultural dominance of the scientific principles
on which that system was based.

These efforts had their greatest effect in Europe. In the aftermath of
the American Revolution, the British had orchestrated the Jacobin
Revolution, the Napoleonic dictatorship and the 1815 Congress of Vienna,
which had spread a wave of enforced cultural pessimism intended to
demoralize Europe's American allies, and to destroy the optimism
generated by the success of the American cause. With the resurgence of
pro-American system reforms on the European continent in the second half
of the nineteenth century, the oligarchy accelerated the spread of this
cultural pessimism, typified by the increasing popular acceptance of
such mind-deadening cultural movements as the existentialism of
Friedrich Nietzsche and Richard Wagner's cult-operas.

In science, such cultural pessimism was expressed by attacks on the
Leibnizian tradition of Gauss, Dirichlet, Riemann et al., exemplified by
the swindles of Napoleon's favorite mathematician, Lagrange, the popular
acceptance of British-centered empiricism, associated with Maxwell, Lord
Kelvin, et al., and the reassertion of Cartesian formalism by Cauchy. By
Einstein's time, this degeneration in science manifested itself most
prominently in the more radical forms of irrationality expressed by the
Copenhagen interpretation of quantum phenomena.

Though Einstein had stubbornly resisted the introduction of such radical
positivism into science, he had been politically targeted by the
liberal-imperialist wing of these London-based synarchists. Playing on
his political naivete and his vulnerability to cultural pessimism, they
sought, sometimes successfully and sometimes not, to manipulate a
politically unsophisticated Einstein for their own ends. As a result,
Einstein was confused about the true cause of the global anxiety to
which he referred, and mystified as to its solution. Nevertheless, he
recognized that the degeneration of society that he was witnessing
coincided with a similar degeneration in science, of which he had a more
clear, albeit incomplete, conception.

It is not surprising that Einstein would find a kindred spirit in
Kepler, whose understanding of the problems confronting science and
society was much deeper than his own. In Kepler's time, irrationality
also dominated European society, despite the previously higher level of
sanity that had been initiated by the circles associated with Nicholas
of Cusa, nearly two centuries earlier. At that time, these humanists had
seized the opportunity afforded them by the collapse of the feudalist
Bardi and Peruzzi banking houses, to assert, as a principle in society,
the Socratic concept of man. Cusa insisted, as Socrates and Plato had,
that cognition, though unique to human beings in a self-conscious form,
reflects a general characteristic of the Universe itself. Thus, contrary
to the Aristotelean dogma that had dominated Europe since the collapse
of Greek society in the centuries following the Peloponnesian Wars, Cusa
understood, like Socrates and Plato, *that the material universe is not
indifferent to human thought, but that man, through his power to
discover universal physical principles, is integral to the
self-development of the Universe as a whole* .

Cusa went further, specifying that the organization of human affairs
must be based on a recognition of the role of the human mind in the
physical world. His circles were able to establish a foothold in
society, exemplified by the achievements in science and art of
Brunelleschi, DaVinci, Pacioli, and the improvements in society created
by the establishment of the first nation-states in Louis XI's France and
Henry VII's England.

In reaction, the Venetian-centered financiers, heirs to the traditions
of Imperial Rome, sought desperately to re-establish feudal control over
Europe by weakening the optimistic concept of man that had taken hold in
the Renaissance. Beginning with the 1492 Spanish Inquisition, Venice and
her allies unleashed religious warfare throughout Europe aimed at
reintroducing a fundamentally irrational view of man and the universe as
a dominant feature of European culture. By the end of Kepler's life,
this horror was erupting into the final orgy of insanity which is today
called the Thirty Years War.

But Kepler understood that the insanity on the ground reflected an
irrational view of heaven. Astronomy in Kepler's time had degenerated
from the search for universal physical principles that had characterized
the Egyptian-Pythagorean science of Sphaerics and reverted back to the
Babylonian-Persian model, which held that Man was incapable of
discovering anything truthful about the nature of the physical world,
and consequently, must accept whatever irrational dogma the reigning
authorities preferred. This view, which shackled science to sophistry,
was designed to impute to the heavens a justification for
oligarchical-imperial forms of society.

Invoking Eratosthenes' description of the Delian problem, Kepler, like
Plato, implored his contemporaries to recognize that their false view of
the planets reflected an equally false view of themselves. The
acceptance, by scientists and society at large, of Aristotelean
doctrines, was the cause of the political and social collapse they were
experiencing. Kepler, an avowed follower of Cusa, insisted that the
governing principles of the universe were congruent with the ability of
the human mind to discover those principles. Further, the existence of
that ability was itself an indication that the characteristics of human
creativity were characteristics of the Universe as a whole. As he wrote
in his *Optics* :

Anyone who ponders this carefully will find (if he will refuse to have
recourse to faith in holy scripture) both that there is a God, founder
of all nature, and that in the very mechanics of it he had care of the
humans that were to come. For this theater of the world is so ordered
that there exist in it suitable signs by which human minds, likenesses
of God, are not only invited to study the divine works, from which they
may evaluate the founder's goodness, but also are assisted in inquiring
more deeply.

Kepler rejected the common error of Ptolemy, Copernicus and Brahe, who
remained faithful to Aristotle's dictat that the planetary orbits must
be perfectly uniform circles. Instead, Kepler adopted Cusa's view, that
change was a *beneficent* characteristic of both Man and the physical
world, and thus, *the non-uniform elliptical orbit more perfectly
expressed the self-perfectability of the Universe, than the
mathematically perfect circles* . In demonstrating from the
experimentally determined evidence that the planetary orbits were indeed
non-uniform and determining the principles governing that motion, Kepler
was demonstrating, contrary to Aristotle, that not only is the physical
universe characterized by change, but that the human mind is capable of
knowing it.

*For Kepler, the planet, as a material object, does not exist in a
purely material world, and its orbit is not governed purely by material
principles. Rather, the planet's historical and future trajectory is a
pathway through a universe in which the principles of physics, life and
cognition are each and all acting everywhere and at all times. Thus, the
principles governing planetary motion not only to guide the planet, they
guide the human mind toward their discovery. As Kepler emphasized, Mind
is a principle in the material world.*

By demonstrating that he could discover and communicate the true
principles governing planetary motion, Kepler was not only advancing
astronomy, he was asserting an optimistic concept of Man and nature in
the face of a prevailing opinion that had been induced to accept
irrationality and arbitrariness in both science and human affairs.

In Einstein's time this cultural irrationality had once again begun to
dominate science. By the end of the nineteenth century, an increasing
amount of experimental evidence, such as the photoelectric effect and
Planck's discovery of the quantization of light and heat, indicated the
existence of a fundamental change in the characteristics of physical
action between the macroscopic and microscopic domains. These
discoveries were consistent with the earlier work of Gauss, Fresnel,
Riemann, Weber, et al. who, extending Leibniz's method of the
infinitesimal calculus, had discovered microscopic principles from their
experimentally determined macroscopic effects. This led Riemann, in his
habilitation dissertation, to insist that it was scientifically unsound
to assume that the characteristics of physical action in the macroscopic
domain could be linearly extended into the very large and very small.
Instead, Riemann insisted, science must develop a dynamic notion of
physical geometry that reflected the potential for non-linear change
between these domains of action.

As Riemann stated:

Knowledge of the causal connection of phenomena is based essentially
upon the precision with which we follow them down into the infinitely
small....In the natural sciences, however, where simple fundamental
concepts are still lacking for such syntheses, one pursues phenomenon
into the spatially small, in order to perceive causal connections, just
as far as the microscope permits. Questions concerning spatial relations
of measure in the indefinitely small are therefore not useless.

In reaction, the British-empiricists tried to revive Kant and Euclid,
most notably through the work of James Clerk Maxwell, who famously
rejected Riemann's approach to physics, in favor of the neo-Euclidean
doctrine which excluded "any geometries other than our own". Thus, when
the relationship between the observed macroscopic effects of
electro-magnetism were considered in light of the growing body of
experimental evidence indicating a change in physical characteristic in
the microscopic domain, Riemann's guidance proved to be essential, which
Einstein recognized.

Among Einstein's contemporaries, however, there was a growing popularity
among scientists to "explain" these phenomena by statistical methods,
similar to those used by Ptolemy, Copernicus and Brahe. These efforts
were led by Niels Bohr, his protege, Werner Heisenberg, and Heisenberg's
first teacher, Max Born.

This positivist view insisted that because they knew of no mathematical
description of these phenomena other than statistical methods, the
universe itself must be fundamentally random. In other words, Bohr,
Heisenberg and Born et al. argued, not that they merely didn't know the
principles on which these phenomena were based, but that no such
principles existed. Since no principles existed, none could be
discovered.

Born summarized his view of the dispute in the published collection of
his correspondence with Einstein:

The basic reason for the dispute between us on the validity of
statistical laws was as follows. Einstein was firmly convinced that
physics can supply su with knowledge of the objectively existing world.
Together with many other physicists I have been gradually converted, as
a result of experiences in the field of atomic quantum phenomena, to the
point of view that this is not so. At any given moment, our knowledge of
the objective world is only a crude approximation from which, by
applying certain rules such as the probability laws of quantum
mechanics, we can predict unknown (e.g. future) conditions.

*It is important to emphasize that this view, known generally as the
Copenhagen interpretation of quantum phenomena, like Ptolemy's
astronomy, was not science. It was a post hoc cult-like belief
reflecting, and ultimately used to justify, the prevalent existentialism
associated with the drive to establish fascist forms of oligarchical
control over the world. In the tradition of the Empires of Babylon,
Persia and Rome, the London-based imperialists intention was to
undermine the successful spread of the cultural optimism associated with
the American system returning to the era of wizards and serfs.*

The axiomatic foundations of the Copenhagen school have since become so
entrenched in popular opinion, that they are accepted as doctrine even
by people who know nothing of physics as exemplified by the widespread
acceptance of the belief that the Mandevillian doctrines of free trade
reflects the, "natural order of things" *.*

Einstein, Planck and a handful of others rejected this radical
positivism, stubbornly defending causality in science throughout the
early decades of the twentieth century. In September 1926 Einstein
stated his view clearly to Born:

Quantum mechanics is certainly imposing. But an inner voice tells me
that it is not yet the real thing. The theory says a lot, but does not
really bring us any closer to the secret of the 'old one'. I, at any
rate, am convinced that *He* is not playing at dice. Waves in
3-dimensional space, whose velocity is regulated by potential energy
(for example, rubber bands)...I am working very hard at deducing the
equations of motion of material points regarded as singularities, given
the differential equation of general relativity.

Writing to Born years later, in September 1944, Einstein summed up the
view he had continued to express:

We have become Antipodean in our scientific expectations. You believe in
the God who plays dice, and I in complete law and order in a world which
objectively exists, and which I, in a wildly speculative way am trying
to capture. I firmly *believe* , but I hope that someone will discover a
more realistic way, or rather a more tangible basis than it has been my
lot to find. Even the great initial success of the quantum theory does
not make me believe in the fundamental dice-game, although I am well
aware that our younger colleagues interpret this as a consequence of
senility. No doubt the day will come when we will see whose instinctive
attitude was the correct one.

In September 1950, after his association with Kurt Goedel had improved
his historical and epistemological knowledge, Einstein wrote Born
saying:

I see from the last paragraph of your letter that you, too, take the
quantum theoretical description as incomplete (referring to an
ensemble). But you are after all convinced that no (complete) laws exist
for a complete description, according to the positivistic maxim *esse
est percipi* . Well, this is a programmatic attitude, not knowledge.
This is where our attitudes really differ. For the time being, I am
alone in my views--as Leibniz was with respect to the absolute space of
Newton's theory. There now, I've paraded my old hobby-horse once again.
But it is your own fault, because you provoked me.

But though Einstein remained stubborn in his resistance to the radical
positivism of the Copenhagen interpretation, and he spent most of his
efforts trying to develop a concept that would replace it, he was unable
to succeed for two related reasons. One, unlike Kepler and Leibniz, he
had been unable to completely rise above the prevailing cultural
pessimism reflected in the degeneration of science and society, and two,
he failed to recognize, as his contemporary Vernadsky had indicated,
*that the questions posed by experimental evidence of quantum phenomena
could not be answered in the domain of mathematical physics* . In
referring to an "objective world" in his rejection of the Copenhagen
interpretation, Einstein was tacitly accepting the Aristotelean
sophistry that the world of thought and the world of physics were
separate. Rather, these questions can only be addressed when physical
phenomena are recognized, as Kepler did, *as observed effects within a
universe in which physics, life, and thought interact in what Riemann
called a multiply-connected manifold* .

Today, the only competent way to approach these questions is from the
standpoint of the science of physical economy, as that science has been
developed by Lyndon H. LaRouche. That approach requires an understanding
of what Gauss and Riemann identified as the hypergeometric domain.

The Universe From the Inside

To begin to get an understanding of what emerged as a hypergeometric
conception of the Universe , we can start by examining the problem that
Einstein identified in his 1930 commemoration of Kepler: the
determination of the orbit of the Earth. This posed a significant
challenge because it meant determining the orbit of the Earth while on
the Earth, or more generally, determining the motions of the solar
system while moving in the solar system.

Kepler understood that any particular scientific investigation, such as
the determination of the orbit of Mars, is actually an investigation of
the Universe as a whole, not of a particular phenomenon.  Any attempt to
reduce the problem to a small set of particulars would be nothing more
than sophistry. This more general problem can be stated: *how to
determine the eternal dynamic nature of the Universe itself, from within
the temporal unfolding of that eternal dynamic?*

As Einstein wrote in his 1930 essay:

Copernicus had opened the eyes of the most intelligent to the fact that
the best way to get a clear grasp of the apparent movements of the
planets in the heavens was by regarding them as movements around the Sun
conceived as stationary. If the planets moved uniformly in a circle
around he Sun, it would have been comparatively easy to discover how
these movements must look from the earth,. Since, however, the phenomena
to be dealt with were much more complicated than that, the task was a
far harder one. The first thing to be done was to determine these
movements empirically from the observations of Tycho Brahe. Only then
did it become possible to think about discovering the general laws which
these movements satisfy.

To grasp how difficult a business it was even to find out about the
actual rotating movements, one has to realize the following. One can
never see where a planet really is at any given moment, but only in what
direction it can be seen just then from the Earth, which is itself
moving in an unknown manner around the Sun. The difficulties thus seemed
practically unsurmountable.

Kepler had to discover a way of bringing order into this chaos. To start
with , he saw that it was necessary first to try and find out about the
motion of the Earth itself.

As Einstein noted, the motion of the planets in the solar system is not
directly observable. One can only observe the relative positions of the
Sun, the planets and the fixed stars, as viewed from the Earth. The
observed changes in these relative positions are thus due to a
combination of motions. Therefore, to determine, for example as Kepler
sought to do, the motion of the planet Mars, it was first necessary to
untangle which part of the observed changes in the relative positions of
Mars, Earth, Sun and fixed stars are due to the motion of each.

Kepler had demonstrated in *The New Astronomy* , Ptolemy, Copernicus,
and Brahe all found different mathematical means to untangle these
motions. The problem for Kepler was that none of them were, or even
claimed to be, true. Kepler, following Cusa, sought to understand the
observed motions as a function of the true causes. But he could not
directly observe these causes, so he had to surpass the limitations of
sense-perception, and imagine the observed motions from a vantage point
that was accessible only through reason.

But before determining the true causes, Kepler had to know the observed
motions which also required him to surpass the limitations of
sense-perceptions. In the case of the observed motions of Mars, Kepler
had to first determine the relationship of Mars to the Earth and the
Sun. This meant knowing the motion of the Earth, which he could not
directly observe. Consequently, he had to imagine how the motion of
Earth would appear were he to observe it from Mars, whose motion he
didn't know!

His approach is detailed in *The New Astronomy* , but its outline is as
follows. From the Earth, one can observe the apparent motion of the Sun
through the zodiac over the course of a year. Kepler understood this
apparent motion of the Sun to be a reflection of the actual motion of
the Earth. The cyclical nature of this motion indicated clearly, that
the Earth's motion was a closed orbit. In this way, he could imagine how
an observer on the Sun would view the Earth.

To view the Earth from Mars was more problematic, because, unlike the
Sun, Mars was also moving. To solve the problem, Kepler began by noting
the position in the zodiac of Mars and the Sun at the unique moment when
the Sun, Earth and Mars are in a direct line with each other. (See
Figure 1.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure001-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure001-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

This configuration is called opposition, which most recently occurred on
November 7, 2005. At this moment an observer on the Earth will see Mars
at a certain place in the zodiac, and an observer on Mars would see both
the Earth and the Sun at a place in the zodiac directly opposite the
position of Mars.

At some point following this observation (historical observation had
determined that this period was 687 Earth days), Mars will return to the
same position in its orbit as when it had previously been in opposition
with the Earth and the Sun. But, the Earth will be in a different place
in its orbit, and because of this, Mars will be observed in a different
place in the zodiac! (See Figure 2.)

![](){height="480" width="720"}

Nevertheless, an observer on Mars would now observe the Sun in the same
place in the zodiac as it had been 687 Earth days earlier. But, he would
see a change in the Earth's position in the zodiac between the two
periods. These observations form a triangle among the Earth, Sun and
Mars, whose base is the direct line formed by the three objects at the
first opposition, and whose legs are formed by the lines of sight from
the Earth to Mars and the Earth to the Sun at this new position of the
Earth. By comparing the observations from these three vantage points,
Kepler could determine the angles of this triangle. By repeating this
calculation, using Tycho Brahe's extensive twenty year record of
observations, Kepler was able to determine a precise orbit of the Earth.
(See Figure 3.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure003-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure003-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

Having determined the orbit of the Earth, Kepler then turned to
determining the orbit of Mars. The extensive record of Kepler's
discovery is detailed in *The New Astronomy* to which the reader is
referred, but there is one point that is crucial to emphasize for what
will follow.

After Kepler determined the size of the Earth's orbit and its eccentric
position relative to the Sun, he found that Mars's orbit was also
eccentric relative to the Sun. His first assumption for the orbits of
both Mars and Earth was that both orbits were circular. For the Earth,
this served as a successful approximation because the Earth's
eccentricity is quite small. However, for Mars, the eccentricity
deviated from pure circularity by a significant amount. Kepler
discovered this by testing the observed positions of Mars against the
geometrical characteristics of a circle: specifically, that three
distinct positions are sufficient to determine a unique circle. Under
this assumption, any three observed positions of Mars would lie on the
same circle. But, after testing 79 sets of three observations each and
found that each set of three lay on a different circle. Kepler then
realized that he was not dealing with a circular orbit and after much
work, he showed that this orbit was an ellipse, with the Sun at one of
the foci.

Untangling the Shadows

As noted above, in seeking to determine the orbit of Mars, Kepler was
seeking to determine the nature of the Universe as a whole; *a Universe
that would produce a solar system with an Earth that had come to be
dominated by life and inhabited by cognitive human beings who were
discovering its principles* .

Kepler realized that to investigate these deeper principles through
astronomy, he had to also investigate the process by which he was
investigating. Just as he had to determine the motions of the solar
system from inside the solar system, to determine the underlying nature
of the Universe, he had to form a self-conscious conception of the role
of his own mind in the development of that Universe. This meant that he
had to investigate: *the connection between the physical parts of the
Universe, the interaction of those physical parts with his senses, the
interaction of those sense perceptions with his mind, and the
interaction of his mind with the Universe as a whole* .

He recognized that since all astronomical observations result from an
interaction of light and the human eye, knowing the principles of light
and vision would provide a link to the connection between the cognitive
and physical domains. As he wrote in the introduction of his *Optics* :

What wonder, then, if that principle of all adornment in the world,
which the divine Moses introduced immediately on the first day into
barely created matter, as a sort of instrument of the Creator, for
giving form and growth to everything--if, I say, this principle, the
most excellent thing in the whole corporeal world, the matrix of the
animate faculties, and the chain linking the corporeal and spiritual
world, has passed over into the same laws by which the world was to be
furnished.

In the *Optics* , Kepler elaborates that this coherence between the laws
of physics and cognition is reflected by expression of the elliptical
planetary orbits and the characteristics of light and vision as special
cases of a single conception of a conical function.

It is important here to dispel the popular myth that is repeated in
virtually every high school and university mathematics department today.
Today's mathematicians, being the artful dodgers they are, insist that
the Greeks investigated the conic sections only for their mathematical
purity, without any regard for their significance in the physical world.
Thus, these sophists maintain that, when Kepler discovered the
elliptical nature of planetary orbits, it was a complete surprise, and
incidental to the purely mathematical concerns of the Greeks.

Nothing could be farther from the truth. The Greek investigation of the
conic sections arose out of the Pythagorean investigations of the
problem of doubling the cube. As Plato states in the *Timaeus* , this
was an investigation of the characteristics of the physical universe,
the way these physical characteristics are truthfully reflected in the
human mind, *and* , the interaction of the human mind with the Universe
as a whole. Thus, Kepler's discovery that the planetary orbits expressed
another form of the same conical function, was not only not accidental,
it was not a surprise, except to today's mathematicians.

Further, when Kepler discovered the planetary manifestation of conic
sections, he also understood this to be of universal significance,
indicating, as did Archytas's construction for the doubling of the cube
by torus, cylinder and cone, that the characteristic of action in the
physical universe is not simply spherical, but is of a higher type--a
type that Gauss and Riemann would later call hypergeometric.

That higher type of hypergeometry begins to emerge through an
investigation of the general form of a single conical function, from
which the elliptical orbits and the doubling of the cube are physical
manifestations. In his *Optics* , Kepler investigated this conical
function from the standpoint of light and vision.

From one perspective, the conic sections can be generated by the motion
of a plane cutting a cone. (see Figure 4.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure004-riemann65.gif"
height="700" width="430"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure004-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"700\" width=\"430\" />

However, if viewed as a projection onto a surface, a mathematical
discontinuity appears, in the transition from the region of elliptical
action to the region of the hyperbolic. (See Figures 5a-b.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure005a-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="686"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure005a-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"686\" />

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure005b-riemann65.gif"
height="322" width="500"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure005b-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"322\" width=\"500\" />

As Kepler describes it:

Speaking analogically rather than geometrically, there exists among
these lines the following order, by reason of their properties: it
passes from the straight line through an infinity of hyperbolas to the
parabola, and thence through an infinity of ellipses to the circle. For
the most obtuse of all hyperbolas is a straight line; the most acute, a
parabola. Likewise, the most acute of all ellipses is a parabola; the
most obtuse, a circle. Thus the parabola has on one side two things
infinite in nature--the hyperbola and the straight line--and on the
other side two things that are finite and return to themselves--the
ellipse and the circle. It itself holds itself in the middle place, with
a middle nature. For it is also infinite, but assumes a limitation from
the other side, for the more it is extended, the more it becomes
parallel to itself, and does not expand its arms (so to speak) like a
hyperbola, but draws back from the embrace of the infinite, always
seeking less although it always embraces more. With the hyperbola, the
more is actually embraced between the arms, the more it also seeks.
Therefore, the opposite limits are the circle and the straight line: the
former is pure curvedness, the latter pure straightness. The hyperbola,
parabola, and ellipse are placed in between, and participate in the
straight and the curved, the parabola equally, the hyperbola in more of
the straightness, and the ellipse in more of the curvedness.

Kepler further showed that the epistemological implications that the
planetary orbits are elliptical, is not only expressed in relationship
to light and vision. Most notably in his *Harmonies of the World* , he
demonstrated the congruence between the relationships of the determining
minimum and maximum speeds among the elliptical orbits, and the
relationships of well-tempered polyphony that J.S. Bach subsequently
developed through his compositions. Here again, a discontinuity appeared
that had a physical significance. Specifically, the existence of the
Lydian intervals formed between the orbits of both Mars and Jupiter and
the yet to be discovered asteroid belt! This physical discontinuity as a
point of change (a type of register shift), is also reflected in the
difference in the physical nature of the planets that inhabit different
sides of this discontinuity. This harmonic relationship, and the
accompanying discontinuity are hereditary reflections of the
harmonically organized plasma disk from which the solar system
developed.

The subsequent discovery of the hyperbolic orbits of comets, and Gauss's
determination of the orbit of the asteroid Ceres, showed that Kepler's
understanding that the elliptical orbits are a special case of a more
general conical function, was correct. This generalized understanding of
Kepler's astronomy was summarized by Gauss in his *Theory of the Motions
of the Heavenly Bodies Moving About the Sun in Conic Sections* .

Gauss, and his student Riemann, went still further, specifying that
Kepler's general conical function was itself a special case of a more
general, higher, hypergeometric, or hyper-conical function. These
hypergeometric functions expressed, not the characteristics of the solar
system per se, but the form of the universal characteristics that
generated the characteristics of the solar system.

The Non-Infinite Universe

In locating the conical functions from the standpoint of a unified
conception of the physical, biological, and cognitive domains of
astronomy, Kepler was advancing the process, begun by Cusa, of returning
science to the higher conceptions of the ante-Euclidean Greeks, and
presaging the later achievements of Kaestner, Gauss and Riemann. This
meant purging science of the pernicious effects of the slavish
acceptance of Euclidean geometry.

A crucial point of attack for Cusa and Kepler was to demolish the false
and arbitrary Aristotelean concept of the mathematical infinite
enshrined in Euclid's Elements.            If space were as Euclid
claimed--infinitely-extended in three rectilinear directions--only
uniform circular or rectilinear motion would be possible. In such a
fantasy world, the experimentally determined non-uniform elliptical
orbits could only exist as arbitrary aberrations in a world that was
assumed not to change.

As Abraham Kaestner later stated, the formal validity of Euclidean
geometry rises or falls on the acceptance of the parallel postulate.
Euclid was so aware of this vulnerability that he did not directly
mention infinity in its statement, and he cited the parallel postulate
only sparingly in the proofs of the theorems that follow. Nevertheless,
as Kaestner and Gauss both underscored, without the assumption of the
parallel postulate, there are no similar triangles, and without similar
triangles, the entire edifice of Euclidean geometry crumbles. Gauss went
further than Kaestner, emphasizing that the parallel postulate could
only be true if one assumed that the curvature of physical space were
zero-- a fact which could only be determined by physical measurement,
not by the mathematical formalism of Euclidean geometry.

From a subjective standpoint, the belief in a physical reality for
Euclidean geometry requires the acceptance of Kant's axiom that the
human mind must be virtually hard-wired to think of the Universe in
Euclidean terms. However, such ancient demonstrations as Archytas's
proof that doubling the "Euclidean" cube depends on a higher conical
function, already demonstrates that Kant's reverence for Euclidean
geometry is false. Kepler's projective construction of the conical
sections, provides a further demonstration that such a Kantian view is
completely illusory.

In Kepler's construction, the infinite appears, not as an unreachable,
indefinite magnitude, but as *a point of change--a transition between
the elliptical and hyperbolic domains of action joined by a single
conical function.* *Thus, from Kepler's standpoint, the infinite is in
the middle, not at the end, of a non-infinite self-bounded manifold* .

The experimental and epistemological arguments for such a concept of a
non-infinite Universe were already presented by Plato in the *Timaeus* .
Cusa and Kepler revived and extended these discussions in many
locations. In his *On Learned Ignorance* , Cusa emphasized that the
apparently infinite emerges in the "unfolded" form of a self-bounded,
"enfolded" Universe. In the unfolded form, opposites, such as the
minimum and maximum appear different, but in the enfolded form, such
opposites coincide. In 1610, Kepler stated a physical argument for
Cusa's self-bounded conception: if the Universe were infinite, the night
sky would not be dark but would be filled with light from an infinite
number of stars. This paradox is today associated with Gauss's close
collaborator, William Olbers, who, nearly two hundred years later
restated it as a direct argument against Kant.

In his habilitation dissertation, Riemann also stated the case for a
non-infinite Universe:

When constructions in space are extended into the immeasurably great,
unlimitedness must be distinguished from infiniteness; the one belongs
to relations of extension, the other to those of measure. That space is
an unlimited, triply extended manifold is an assumption applied in every
conception of the external world; by it at every moment the domain of
real perceptions is supplemented and the possible locations of an object
that is sought for are constructed, and in these applications the
assumption is continually being verified. The unlimitedness of space has
therefore a greater certainty, empirically, than any experience of the
external. From this, however, follows in no wise its infiniteness, but
on the contrary space would necessarily be finite, if one assumes that
bodies are independent of situation and so ascribes to space a constant
measure of curvature, provided this measure of curvature had any
positive value however small.

As Cusa emphasized, this *anti-Euclidean* notion of a self-bounded
Universe, conforms to the nature of both the physical world *and Man* .
Like the physical world, man's life is finite but unbounded. It begins
at birth and ends at death. From this standpoint of mortality, the world
before birth and the world after death, appear to be infinitely far way.
But that finite life, through the transmission of creative discoveries
through culture, affects, and is affected by, what precedes and follows
it. The apparently infinite domains, beyond the temporal limits, are not
outside one's mortal life, but at the center of it. *Thus, to believe in
a Euclidean geometry is to reject the immortality of the human soul* .

Cusa's and Kepler's annulment of Euclidean geometry set the stage for
the development of a new, physically determined concept of a
non-infinite geometry. The first steps taken in that direction are due
to the work of Girard Desargues (1593-1662) who junked Euclidean
geometry in favor of Kepler's notion of projective relationships, thus,
banning the Aristotelean concept of the infinite completely from
science.

A simple experiment can be performed to illustrate Desargues' method.
Draw a large rectangle on a whiteboard. The opposite sides of the
rectangle would appear, from the assumptions of Euclidean geometry, to
be parallel, and thus never meet, even if infinitely extended. Now take
a transparent pane of plexiglass and tilt it at an angle to the plane of
the whiteboard. With one eye closed, trace the outline of the rectangle
onto the plexiglass. This action produces a conical projection of the
whiteboard onto the plane of the plexiglass, with the eye as the apex of
the cone. Under this projection, the images of the opposite sides of the
rectangle, that appeared to be parallel on the whiteboard, now intersect
on the plexiglass. *Thus, with a turn of the head, the infinite is
brought into the finite!*

In this way, Desargues began to generalize Kepler's elaboration of
Cusa's idea of a non-infinite Universe producing many important
discoveries that are crucial for the later development of science, one
of which is particularly important for our argument here.

Desargues showed that, though under projection lengths, proportions of
lengths and angles are, in general, changed, there is one characteristic
that remains invariant. Later called the cross-ratio, this
characteristic is the ratio of two ratios formed among four arbitrary
points. (See Figure 6.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure006-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure006-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

Since the conic sections are in a projective relationship to each other,
the invariance of the cross-ratio is a characteristic of the conical
function. (See Figure 7.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure007-riemann65.png"
height="600" width="900"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure007-riemann65.png\"
alt=\"\" height=\"600\" width=\"900\" />

A further illustration of this same principle can be taken from another
discovery of Desargues--the complete quadrilateral. Desargues proved
that the intersections of the extended sides and diagonals of an
arbitrary quadrilateral form a projective configuration in which the
cross ratios are preserved. (See Figure 8.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure008-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure008-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

This type of cross ratio is a special case, called harmonic, because B
divides segment AC in the same proportion that C divides AD. If one now
looks at the complete quadrilateral dynamically, and imagines, in the
tradition of Kepler, that point D moves off towards the infinite in one
direction, the position of points A, B and C must also move in order to
maintain the harmonic relationship among all four points. This motion
will also change the angles of the quadrilateral. (See Figure 9.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure009-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure009-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

When the sides of the quadrilateral become parallel, point D reaches the
infinite, or, inversely, when D reaches the infinite, the sides of the
quadrilateral become parallel. At this point, the harmonic cross ratio
with points A, B and C is still maintained. (See Figure 10.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure010-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure010-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

If we now tilt the sides of the quadrilateral a little more, point D
appears to return from the infinite on the other side of point A, all
the while maintaining the harmonic proportions with points A, B, and C. 
(See Figure 11.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure011-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure011-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

From the standpoint of Euclidean geometry, the harmonic characteristic
of the complete quadrilateral seems mystical, because in Euclidean
geometry, the infinite can have no effect on the finite. But as
Desargues' construction demonstrates, the "infinite" in the complete
quadrilateral, is, as in Kepler's projective conics, a single point of
change, which maintains an harmonic relationship to the finite parts,
just as any "finite" point does. This type of paradox confronts the
dilemma of Euclidean sophists: either, maintain Euclidean geometry and
insist that the harmonic characteristics of the complete quadrilateral
are magic, or, recognize, as Kepler did, that the experimental evidence
that physical principles express such harmonic relationships, and admit
that Euclidean geometry is a fraud.

The complete quadrilateral also illustrates an early expression of what
would later be called by Riemann, "Dirichlet's Principle". There is a
single connected relationship among the position of points A, B, C and
D, and the angles and lengths of the sides and diagonals of the
quadrilateral. This relationship is an effect of the harmonic principle
reflected by the invariance of the cross-ratio. It is this harmonic
principle that is primary. The positions of the visible objects are a
function of that harmonic principle.

The harmonic relationship exists, even if one of the points appears to
be infinitely far away because the point at infinity is not outside the
process, but within it. What appears to be infinite is merely a point of
change, within an otherwise non-infinite self-bounded manifold.

*The complete quadrilateral, and Kepler's conics cannot exist in a
Euclidean infinitely-extended space, but only in a Cusan-Keplerian
non-infinite self-bounded manifold. In such a manifold, change is an
essential characteristic and what appears to be mathematically infinite
is understood as an expression of that change.*

The Road to the Hyper-conical

After Desargues' the nature and physical expression of Kepler's conical
function was elaborated further by Blaise Pascal and Leibniz. In his
development of the infinitesimal calculus, Leibniz showed that the
conical function had three distinct but related forms: the exponential,
circular and hyperbolic. Through his collaboration with Bernoulli,
Leibniz demonstrated that the catenary is a physical expression of the
three forms of conical functions. This showed, once again, that the
physical characteristics of the Universe conformed to the
Cusan-Keplerian concept of a non-infinite self-bounded manifold.
However, already embedded in Kepler's astronomy was experimental
evidence that these conical functions must be superceded by a higher
type of *hyper-conical function* . This manifested itself in the
so-called "Kepler Problem", whose investigation led Gauss to first
discover what he called the elliptical transcendentals.

The "Kepler Problem" arose from the effort to determine the motion of a
planet in an elliptical orbit. Kepler had already shown that it was
impossible to completely describe the principle on which this motion was
based with respect to the functions of circular action. The subsequent
work of Leibniz not only confirmed this, but also indicated that the
other functions associated with conical action--the hyperbolic and
exponential--were also inadequate to describe the motion of a planet in
an elliptical orbit. As early as 1797 Gauss recognized that this was
because elliptical motion is governed by the *elliptical*
transcendentals, which are a distinct and higher form than the simple
circular, exponential and hyperbolic functions.

Subsequent to these early discoveries, Gauss continued to explore the
relationship between these two transcendental domains. One of his most
intriguing insights is expressed by his investigations of the
pentagramma mirificum. The pentagramma mirificum was originally
discovered by Kepler's contemporary John Napier in connection with his
investigations of spherical trigonometry. Napier had recognized that the
self bounded nature of the sphere is reflected in the connected
relationship between the sides and angles of a spherical triangle. In
such a spherical triangle, the lengths of the sides are a function of
the angles and vice versa. In the special case of a spherical right
triangle, this relationship is expressed by the pentagramma mirificum.

Unlike a Euclidean triangle, in which the sides are measured as lengths,
in a spherical triangle, both the sides and the angles are measured as
angles. (See Figure 12.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure012-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure012-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

Napier showed that in a right spherical triangle, the three sides and
two other angles are connected to each other by a relationship between
their sines and cosines. (See Figure13.).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure013-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure013-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

The relationship among these five components can be ordered so that they
form a self-polar spherical pentagon, which Napier called, the
pentagramma mirificum. (See Figure 14.).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure014-riemann65.png"
height="746" width="900"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure014-riemann65.png\"
alt=\"\" height=\"746\" width=\"900\" />

Gauss was intrigued by the relationship of Napier's spherical pentagram
to his elliptical transcendentals. He realized that Napier's pentagramma
mirificum established that a spherical surface had an intrinsic
five-fold periodicity. He saw this five-fold periodicity in light of a
well known discovery of Apollonius that five points are required to
uniquely determine a conic section. This distinguishes the general conic
section from a circle, which requires only three points, and a line,
that requires only two. Gauss recognized that the five-fold periodicity
of the sphere and the five point determination of conics, reflected the
distinction between the higher form of elliptical transcendentals and
the lower form of transcendental associated with circular, hyperbolic
and exponential functions.

These simple transcendentals, associated with Kepler's conical function,
arise in connection with physical action characterized by a single
principle of change, such as the incommensurability between the arc and
the sine in uniform circular motion. However, the elliptical
transcendentals, as Gauss showed, are characterized by two principles of
change, exemplified in an ellipse by the double incommensurability
between the sine and the arc and the sine and the angle. A similar
*elliptical* double incommensurability appears in a *circular* pendulum
between the angle and the sine and the angle and the time.

The connection between the spherical pentagram and the elliptical
functions is illustrated by Gauss's demonstration that, when the
spherical self-polar pentagon is projected onto a plane that is tangent
to the sphere, by a cone whose apex is at the center of the sphere, a
rectilinear plane pentagon is produced. (See Figure 15. )

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure015-riemann65.png"
height="600" width="900"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure015-riemann65.png\"
alt=\"\" height=\"600\" width=\"900\" />

The five vertices of this plane pentagon define a unique ellipse. The
altitude lines of this plane pentagon all intersect at one point, which
is the image of the point of tangency of the plane to sphere. (See
Figure 16.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure016-riemann.png"
height="820" width="900"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure016-riemann.png\"
alt=\"\" height=\"820\" width=\"900\" />

Gauss showed that this characteristic is a reflection of the fact that
the vertices and opposite sides of the plane pentagon were images of
poles and equators of the spherical self-polar pentagon. (See Figure
17.).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure017-riemann65.png"
height="900" width="900"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure017-riemann65.png\"
alt=\"\" height=\"900\" width=\"900\" />

This reflected a type of "Dirichlet's Principle" in that on the sphere,
the altitude lines of the spherical pentagram can intersect at any point
inside the spherical pentagon. However, on the plane pentagon there is
only one set of altitude lines. Thus, the spherical self-polar pentagon
reflects an entire manifold of plane pentagons, each of which reflects
elliptical action. The relationship among these plane pentagons can only
be expressed by an elliptical transcendental. Thus, the spherical
pentagramma mirificum is an unfolded form of an elliptical function.

In his work on the pentagramma mirificum, Gauss then investigated this
plane pentagon inscribed in an ellipse, in light of Kepler's
determination of the position of a planet in an elliptical orbit. (See
Figure 18.).

![](){height="900" width="900"}

He showed that this relationship, between the spherical pentagon and its
projection, was expressed by his new *elliptical* transcendentals. This
fact indicated that the characteristics of spherical action were
implicitly elliptical and could not be completely characterized by
circular functions, as naive sense-perception might indicate. Inversely,
the fact that the experimental evidence demonstrated that the planetary
motion is elliptical, not circular as Aristotle dogmatically insisted,
demanded the rejection of naive notions of the sphere in favor of the
higher forms of cognition indicated by Gauss's and Riemann's
hypergeometric functions.

The Riemannian Self-Developing Domain

Just as Kepler's method, provoked by the experimentally determined
elliptical orbits, produced the concept of a non-infinite self-bounded
conical function, that same method, provoked by the "Kepler Problem",
compelled Gauss to supercede Kepler's result, (as Kepler himself
demanded) producing the concept of the higher elliptical transcendental.
However, such elliptical transcendentals are inadequate to express the
higher forms of physical action which Riemann characterized as
"multiply-connected continuous manifolds". An adequate method to
understand these types of physical action was not achieved until Riemann
unified and advanced Gauss's work on the hypergeometric functions.
Further, just as Kepler's elliptical orbits, and Gauss's investigation
of them, produced concepts of universal significance, Riemann's
investigation into physical processes governed by hypergeometric
functions, produced a greater understanding of the Universe as a whole.

That understanding was elaborated in his *Theory of Abelian Functions*
and his lectures on Gauss's hypergeometric function. In those works,
Riemann develops the power of Riemann surfaces to represent the concepts
associated with multiply-connected hypergeometric action. Since the
construction of Riemann's surfaces has been treated in detail in
previous installments of this series, we only summarize those
constructions here.

Riemann recognized that the non-infinite, self-bounded manifold
indicated by, Kepler's conical function, or Desargues projective
geometry conforms to a stereographic mapping of a plane onto a spherical
surface. This "Riemann sphere" is a non-infinite, self-bounded surface,
in which the north pole of that surface is the point of change, which is
apparently infinite in the planar form. When Kepler's conical function
is projected onto the Riemann sphere, the apparently discontinuous
conical function of Kepler beccomes a continuous function. (See Figure
19.).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure019-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="734"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure019-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"734\" />

The discontinuity between the elliptical and hyperbolic action remains,
but on the Riemann sphere it is clearly represented, not as a
Euclidean-type mathematical infinite, but as a singular point of change.
A similar construction can also be imagined for Desargues' complete
quadrilateral.

Riemann showed that the simply periodic, circular, hyperbolic, and
exponential transcendentals conform to the form of a non-infinite,
self-bounded manifold expressed by a Riemann sphere. (See Figures 20.).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure020-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure020-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

However, Gauss, Jacobi, Abel, and Riemann all showed that the doubly
periodic elliptical transcendentals, produce four points at infinity. (
See Figure 21.).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure021-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure021-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

Riemann emphasized that a non-infinite, self-bounded manifold of four
discontinuities cannot be represented in a spherical form. Rather, its
geometrical characteristics conform to the shape of a torus. (See Figure
22.).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure022-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure022-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

In continuing this investigation into the hyper-elliptical and Abelian
functions, Riemann showed that each successive gradation of
transcendental function, contained an increasing number of
discontinuities. Consequently, each increase in the number of
discontinuities is associated with a change in the characteristic
(genus) of the associated non-infinite, self-bounded manifold. (See
Figure 23.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure023-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure023-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

The geometrical representation of the change between manifolds of
different genera is consistent with the topological difference between a
sphere and a torus. That topological difference is expressed by the
ability of the manifold to admit a greater number of distinct pathways
of action. Thus, each successive species of non-infinite, self-bounded
manifold, is capable of expressing physical action of successively
greater complexity.

But just as Kepler's treatment of conic sections from a projective
standpoint revealed the underlying epistemological significance of
elliptical motion, viewing this succession of self-bounded Riemannian
manifolds in a projective form also unveils their true beauty.

Take as a starting point the simplest case: the self-bounded spherical
manifold. The projection of this manifold is expressed by the projective
relationship of Kepler and Desargues. Now, take the next case: the
self-bounded torus associated with elliptical transcendentals. Its
projective form is a parallelogram with four apparently infinite
magnitudes. (See Figure 24.).

![](){height="480" width="720"}

Consider this species of manifold, as Riemann did, as a manifold of
physical potential. In this respect, the relationships between the
orthogonal pathways of minimal and maximal change in potential, are
determined, by the four apparently infinite magnitudes. Just as the
"point at infinity" determines, for example, the harmonic
characteristics of the complete quadrilateral, the four "points at
infinity" of an elliptical transcendental determines the harmonic
characteristics of this manifold. This is expressed, for example, by the
transformation of the characteristic of the potential from a circular
boundary near the center of the manifold, into a square boundary towards
the edge.

However, we must consider the apparently infinite magnitudes in the
elliptical transcendentals, not as "infinities" but as discontinuities
within an otherwise self-bounded continuous process. In other words,
just as Kepler's conical function transformed the apparently infinite
boundary between the elliptical and hyperbolic into a discontinuity
within an otherwise continuous, self-bounded manifold, a similar means
to "continue across the infinite" must be found for the elliptical
transcendentals.

To do this, Riemann utilized a discovery of another student of Gauss,
Ferdinand Moebius who elaborating Gauss's treatment of complex
functions. Moebius investigated the characteristics of what appeared to
be the simplest type of complex functions: simple linear
transformations, of the form (a\*z+b)/(c\*z+d), where z is a variable
and a, b, c, d are arbitrary complex numbers. These Moebius
transformations play a similar role with respect to the higher
transcendental functions that the exponential functions play with
respect to Leibniz's catenary and the simple transcendentals.

Examples of simple transformations are translation, inversion, rotation,
and combinations of all three. (See Figures 25a-f).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure025a-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure025a-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure025b-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure025b-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure025c-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure025c-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure025d-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure025d-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure025e-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure025e-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure025f-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure025f-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

What Moebius discovered was that these simple types of complex
transformations are actually generalizations of Kepler's and Desargues'
projective geometry. Under these Moebius transformations, the
cross-ratio among any four complex numbers is invariant. When the
cross-ratio is a non-complex number, the four points lie either on a
circle or a line. In keeping with Cusa, a line must be considered a
circle whose center is the "point at infinity".

A unique Moebius transformation can always be found that maps any three
points to zero, one and infinity. Thus, it is most simple geometrically
to define the cross-ratio, with respect to Moebius transformations, when
three of the points forming the cross-ratio are zero, one and infinity.
On a Riemann sphere, this means the points are at the south pole, the
north pole and the equator. (See Figure 26.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure026-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure026-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

However, in the case of the elliptical transcendentals, there are four
points that map to infinity and four points that map to one.
Nevertheless, a simple set of Moebius transformations will continue this
projection across the infinite. (See Figure 27.).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure027-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure027-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

This gives us a projected image of the self-bounded torus, with a
greater density of discontinuities than in is possible in a spherical
manifold. (See Figure 28a,b.).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure028a-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure028a-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure028b-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure028b-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

For the hyper-elliptical case, the projected image of the Riemann
surface is a type of octagon with eight "points at infinity", and eight
points that map to unity. As in the case of the elliptical function,
these eight points at infinity determine the harmonic characteristics of
the manifold, but unlike the elliptical case, eight points at infinity
are associated with a change to negative curvature. A different species
of Moebius transformation continues this projection across the infinite.
Thus, the hyper-elliptic function can only exist in a negatively curved,
non-infinite, self-bounded manifold. (See Figure 29a,b.).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure029a-riemann65.gif"
height="636" width="636"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure029a-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"636\" width=\"636\" />

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure029b-riemann65.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure029b-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

Such a manifold cannot be represented completely in visible space.
Therefore, we can only "observe" such a manifold as a projection onto
the cave wall of sense-perception.

However, it is important to underscore the significance of the change in
characteristic curvature between the elliptical and hyper-elliptical.
The spherical manifolds are characterized by positive curvature. The
torus combines both positive and negative curvature for a net curvature
of zero. The self-bounded manifolds of the hyper-elliptical and beyond
are characterized by negative curvature.

From this standpoint, the discontinuity that appears in Kepler's conical
function between the elliptical and hyperbolic domains takes on a new
light. It conforms to the change in characteristic between the generally
positively curved manifolds of the simple and elliptical transcendentals
to the negatively curved manifolds of the hyper-elliptic (hyperbolic)
forms.

Riemann recognized the significance of this change and suggested that
only a notion of space that encompasses all three types of curvature
could adequately represent universal principles. In his habilitation
dissertation he proposed an image for such a manifold as an intersecting
sphere, cylinder and the negatively curved inner portion of a torus.
(See Figure 30.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure030-riemann65.gif"
height="372" width="400"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure030-riemann65.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"372\" width=\"400\" />

One circle lies on all three surfaces, and forms the image of visible
space.

Once again, the Euclidean plane of zero curvature does not exist, except
in the minds of Aristoteleans and fools. It is merely a limited view of
a manifold that is both positively and negatively curved. Such a
manifold, represented by the torus of Riemann's surfaces, or ,
metaphorically by, the cylinder in the above construction, is simply a
transition between the predominately positively curved domain of visible
space and the predominately negatively domain of the very large and very
small.

Thus, the Universe cannot be characterized by a single type of
curvature. Rather, it must be thought of as a dynamic process in which
all three types of curvatures are interacting.

In this way, we can form from Riemann's treatment of Abelian and
hypergeometric functions, a concept, not of a single non-infinite,
self-bounded manifold, but of a nested succession of such manifolds, a
type of manifold of manifolds. Such a manifold of manifolds, which in
Riemann's representation, begins with the simple self-bounded sphere,
continues to the torus, and then into the hyper-elliptical and higher
functions, forms a concept of the form of a non-infinite,
*self-developing* , self-bounded Universe.

A Final Look at Kepler, Riemann and Einstein

Einstein concluded his 1930 commemoration of Kepler saying:

It seems that the human mind has first to construct forms independently
before we can find them in things. Kepler's marvelous achievement is a
particularly fine example of the truth that knowledge cannot spring from
experience alone but only from the comparison of the inventions of the
intellect with observed fact.

These closing statements reflect Einstein's rejection of positivism, and
echo, albeit in a weakened form, the influence of Kepler and Riemann on
his thinking. Yet, they also point out his failing. Progress in science
depends on developing a strengthened tie to Kepler and Riemann. The
human mind does not "first construct forms independently before we can
find them in things", because it is never independent of the Universe in
which it exists. The interaction of the intellect with observed fact, is
not the interaction of two separate domains. It is an interaction which
*changes* the self-developing, multiply-connected domains of physics,
life and thought.

Kepler's marvelous achievement is a fine example of *this* type of
thinking. What is needed now, is more than simple admiration for Kepler.
What is needed is an army of new Kepler's, who, equipped with Riemann's
conceptions and LaRouche's discoveries, will do as Kepler did during
that brief interval of time that ended on this date 375 years ago:
confront the paradoxes presented by nature and find in them, a deeper
understanding of Man.

65
:::

::: {.addtoany_share_save_container .addtoany_content_bottom}
::: {.a2a_kit .a2a_kit_size_32 .addtoany_list a2a-url="http://lymcanada.org/65/" a2a-title="Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 65 :  On the 375th Anniversary of Kepler"}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F65%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2065%20%3A%20%20On%20the%20375th%20Anniversary%20of%20Kepler "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F65%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2065%20%3A%20%20On%20the%20375th%20Anniversary%20of%20Kepler "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/google_plus?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F65%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2065%20%3A%20%20On%20the%20375th%20Anniversary%20of%20Kepler "Google+"){.a2a_button_google_plus}
[](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd .addtoany_share_save}
:::
:::
:::

[ [ Posted on ]{.screen-reader-text} [February 20, 2010 February 24,
2019](http://lymcanada.org/65/) ]{.posted-on} [ [ [ Author
]{.screen-reader-text} [Bruce
Director](http://lymcanada.org/author/bdirector/){.url .fn .n} ]{.author
.vcard} ]{.byline} [ [ Categories ]{.screen-reader-text}
[EN](http://lymcanada.org/category/en/) , [Riemmann for
Anti-Dummies](http://lymcanada.org/category/science-1/c132-riemmann-for-anti-dummies/)
]{.cat-links}
