::: post-thumbnail
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.attachment-post-thumbnail
.size-post-thumbnail .wp-post-image width="243" height="230"
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part67_files_afigure01-riemann67.jpg"}

\<img width=\"243\" height=\"230\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part67_files_afigure01-riemann67.jpg\"
class=\"attachment-post-thumbnail size-post-thumbnail wp-post-image\"
alt=\"\" />
:::

::: entry-header
# Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 67 : A View From The Top {#riemann-for-anti-dummies-part-67-a-view-from-the-top .entry-title}
:::

::: entry-content
::: pf-content
August 28, 2006 (6:25pm)

## The View From the Top

by Bruce Director

For more than three millennia the motion of a spinning top has been a
source of great amusement for children, scientists, and philosophers. A
careful examination of its motion provides insight into the underlying
dynamics of the universe and exposes the fraud of absolute space. Plato
took great delight in the embarrassment the top's motion caused his
Eleatic and Sophist adversaries, who argued that motion and change did
not really exist. Nicholas of Cusa enjoyed the image of a spinning top
as a beautiful expression of the universe's self-boundedness. From a
Riemannian standpoint, that same simple spinning top is still a great
source of fun, unfolding Cusa's concept into the domain of
hypergeometries, and twisting Plato's modern adversaries into gnarled
knots. [ ]{#more-1176}

Spin a top or a gyroscope. Watch its motion carefully. What moves?
Relative to what? What remains at rest? Relative to what? How do those
motions and non-motions change and interact? What do these observed
motions indicate about the characteristics of the universe itself,
including the characteristics of the human mind?

This latter question, which most occupied Plato and Cusa, is what
concerns us in the following pedagogical discussion. To set the stage,
let us first look at their view of the top.

Plato introduces the spinning top in the fourth book of the { *Republic*
}, as a refutation of the attempts of the Eleatics and Sophists to deny
the power of the human mind to comprehend the physical universe, by
promulgating fallacies of composition typified by Zeno's or Parmenides'
paradox. Such frauds argued that an inherent contradiction existed
between thought and physics, which made it impossible for the human mind
to know anything about the physical world. This contradiction, the
Sophists maintained, could be expressed by investigating motion. Their
argument went, that since at every instant a moving body is changing, it
must be always simultaneously at motion and at rest. Since this is not
possible, either motion does not exist, or, if it does, our minds are
incapable of comprehending it. As Parmenides states this in Plato's
dialogue:

"For the instant seems to indicate a something from which there is a
change in one direction or the other. For it does not change from rest
while it is still at rest, nor from motion while it is still moving; but
there is this strange instantaneous nature, something interposed between
motion and rest, not existing in any time, and into this and out from
this that which is in motion changes into rest and that which is at rest
changes into motion....Then the one, if it is at rest and in motion,
must change in each direction; for that is the only way in which it can
do both. But in changing, it changes instantaneously, and when it
changes it can be in no time, and at that instant it will be neither in
motion nor at rest."
^[1](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part67.html#Footnote1)^

But Plato recognized the trick. The real target of the Eleatic fallacy
of composition was not the physical existence of motion, but the idea
that the human mind could know anything about the physical universe. The
real fraud, therefore, is not stated in the argument, which flows quite
logically, but in the unstated underlying assumption: that all physical
motion exists within an absolute space, infinitely extended,
rectilinearly, as described later by Euclid, and an absolute time
ticking away according to some great time piece that exists, prior to,
and outside, the universe itself. Plato cites the spinning top to show
that it is physical motion that defines space and time, not, as the
Eleatics maintained, { *a priori* } absolute space and time that defines
motion :

Then if the disputant should carry the jest still further with the
subtlety that tops at any rate stand still as a whole, at the same time
they are in motion, when with the peg fixed in one point they revolve,
and that the same is true of any other case of circular motion about the
same spot--we should reject the statement on the ground that the repose
and the movement in such cases were not in relation to the same parts of
the objects, but we would say that there was a straight line and a
circumference in them and that in respect of the straight line they are
standing still, since they do not incline to either side, but in respect
of the circumference they move in a circle; but that when as they
revolve they incline the perpendicular to right of left or forward or
back, then they are in no wise at rest....No such remarks then will
disconcert us or any whit the more make us believe that it is ever
possible for the same thing at the same time in the same respect and the
same relation to suffer, be, or do opposites".
^[2](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part67.html#Footnote2)^

Cusa took Plato's argument further, in a dialogue which he called by a
Latin word which he inveneted: {" *De Possest* "}. As Cusa explains it:

For let us agree that there is a single word which signifies by a very
simple signification as much as is signified by the compound expression
"Possibility exists" (" *posse est"* )--meaning that possibility itself
exists. Now, because what exists exists actually: the
possibility-to-be-exists insofar as the possibility-to-be is actual.
Suppose we call this { *possest* }. All things are enfolded in it and {
*possest* } is a sufficiently approximate name for God, according to our
human concept of Him.
^[3](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part67.html#Footnote3)^

To illustrate this concept Cusa introduces the metaphor of a top
spinning with "infinite" velocity (circle *bc* ) inside a fixed circle (
*de* ). (See Figure 1.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure01-riemann67.jpg"
height="230" width="243"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure01-riemann67.jpg\"
alt=\"\" height=\"230\" width=\"243\" />

CARDINAL: Let it suffice, that by means of this image and
metaphorically, we are somehow able to see how it is that (if the circle
*bc* were illustrative of eternity and the circle *de* were illustrative
of time) the following propositions are not self-contradictory: "that
eternity as a whole is at once present at every point of time"; "that
God as the Beginning and the End is at once and as a whole present in
all things" and so on for other such propositions.

BERNARD: Things which are separated for us are not at all separated in
God. For example, *d* and *e* are separated by that diameter of the
circle of which they are opposite points. But there is no such
separation in God; for when *b* comes to *d* , it is at the same time
also at *e* . Similarly, all the things which are separated in time in
our world are present before God. And all the things which in our world
are separated as opposites exist conjointly in God. And all the things
which *here* are different are *there* identical.
^[4](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part67.html#Footnote4)^

For Plato and Cusa the spinning top was not merely a toy. Its motion
reflects, in microcosm, the movement of the physical universe, such as
the motion of the heavenly bodies, and the characteristics of the
metaphysical principles governing that motion. Our notions of time and
space are not absolute. They are inseparable from this physical motion.

As Plato describes this in the { *Timaeus* }:

Accordingly, seeing that that Model is an eternal Living Creature, He
set about making this Universe, so far as He could, of a like kind. But
inasmuch as the nature of the Living Creature was eternal, this quality
it was impossible to attach in its entirety to what is generated;
wherefore He planned to make a movable image of Eternity, and, as he set
in order the Heaven, of that Eternity which abides in unity He made an
eternal image, moving according to number, even that which we have named
Time...

Time, then, came into existence along with the Heaven...
^[5](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part67.html#Footnote5)^

For at least the last three thousand years, all progress in civilization
has occurred by rejecting the sophistry of absolute space and time, and
all periods of regress and stagnation, including our own, have been
characterized by the popular acceptance of some notion of absolute space
and time. This is why every great scientist, from Plato, to Philo, to
Augustine, to Cusa, to Kepler, Fermat, Leibniz, Gauss, Riemann and
Einstein, have all polemicized against the Eleatic sophistry of absolute
space and time. Once science, or the population as a whole, accepts the
idea of absolute space and time, they become suckers for such fallacies
of composition as, "motion does not exist", or, "wealth is derived from
money".

But something else is posed by Plato's and Cusa's metaphor of the
spinning top. The self-boundedness of the universe is expressed in
physical action by harmonic characteristics, or what modern science
would call the *quantization of space-time* . Such quantized harmonic
characteristics are exemplified by the uniqueness of the five regular
solids, Kepler's harmonic principles of planetary motion, the periodic
and crystallographic characteristics of physical chemistry, and Planck's
quantum of action.

Such quantized harmonic characteristics, though recognized much earlier,
could not be adequately understood, however, until Gauss's development
of the complex domain, and Riemann's elaboration of it through his work
on Abelian and hypergeometric functions. For this, we again turn to the
spinning top.

The Spinning Top and Elliptic Functions

Look again at the spinning top without the prejudices of Euclidean type
notions of space and time. Stand a top on its tip. What is its motion
when it is not spinning? A rotation in the direction of the pull of
gravity. What is its motion when it is spinning? This is more complex.
For the top is not spinning in absolute space. It is spinning with
respect to a gravitational potential. That means that the top's motion
is the effect of the interaction of the characteristics of its spin and
the gravitational potential.

This combined action produces a single complex motion expressed by the
connected motion of the top around its axis and the motion of the axis
itself. This latter motion is called precession, and is, in general,
incommensurable, with the top's rotation around its axis.

Were the top to be perfectly symmetrical and spinning so that its axis
of rotation were perpendicular to the pull of gravity, the precession
would be zero. But, as Cusa notes in { *De Docta Ignorantia* } there is
no perfect circle, (or symmetrical top) in the physical universe.
Because of this uneven distribution of the top's mass, both gravity and
the spin of the top will be acting together on the top's motion.
Consequently, a real spinning top will have both rotation and
precession. This motion is a microcosm of the Earth's motion, whose
rotation produces a non-spherical shape. Consequently, the Earth
exhibits precession which is observed as the approximately 26,000 year
cycle of the procession of the equinoxes.
^[6](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part67.html#Footnote6)^

Thus, the motion of the spinning top is neither the motion { *around* }
the axis, nor the motion { *of* } the axis, but the { *connected* }
motion of both, produced by the { *connected* } action of rotation and
gravity. Doubly connected action of this type, since the discoveries of
Gauss and Riemann, has been characterized by what have come to be called
{ *elliptic functions* }.

Like Kepler's planetary orbits, the top's motion is not occurring in the
absolute Euclidean-type space of Newton, Euler, Kant, et al. It is the
physical principles governing the motion which define the
characteristics of space and time. For the planetary orbits, Kepler
emphasized, it is the harmonic characteristics of the solar system that
define the path of the planet and the motion of the planet itself which
defines time. The characteristics of the governing physical principle
emerge, in the discontinuity between determining the time as a function
of the planet's position and determining the planet's position as a
function of time . (The Kepler Problem.)

Similarly with the spinning top. It is when the position of the top is
defined as a function of time, determined by the motion of the top
itself, that the elliptical function arises. { *Thus, the motion of the
spinning top is defining a physically determined anti-Euclidean
space-time* }of the type identified by Kepler, Leibniz, Gauss, Riemann,
and in a somewhat weaker form, by Planck and Einstein.

Though such elliptic functions, are associated by name with an ellipse,
they are nevertheless much more universal. They are not derived from the
formal geometrical properties of an ellipse, but from the metaphysical
implications of the physical existence of non-uniform motion,
exemplified by Kepler's determination of the elliptical nature of the
planetary orbits. Though these functions have been treated in some
detail in previous installments of this series, we take a quick spin
through the history of their development, in order to keep the essential
concepts clear and fresh in the mind of the reader.

The earliest recorded expression of what modern physics would recognize
as an elliptical function is Archytas's construction for determining two
geometric means between two extremes. The "elliptical" characteristic of
this construction becomes most apparent when contrasted with the general
form of the construction of one geometric mean between two extremes.

In the latter case, the general construction for generating the
proportions of one geometric mean between two extremes is expressed by
the rotation of a right-angle in a semi-circle. (See Figure 2.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure02-riemann67.gif"
height="233" width="400"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure02-riemann67.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"233\" width=\"400\" />

In this case, the magnitude is generated by the connected relationship
of the { *non-uniform* } motion of a point on a circle ( *P* ) and a
point on a line ( *Q* ). The non-uniformity of this motion is intrinsic
to the construction. If the motion of (P) is uniform, the motion of (Q)
is non-uniform. If the motion of (Q) is uniform, the motion of (P) is
non-uniform.

*Thus, the magnitude that has the power to create one geometric mean in
a given proportion, is a type of quantity which Cusa would identify as
arising from the difference between the straight and the curved.*

However, as the Archytas construction demonstrates, the magnitude that
has the power to generate two geometric means between two extremes,
depends on rotating that circle in which one geometric mean is
generated. In this case, the point (Q) is moving, not just on a line,
but simultaneously on a circle. Point (P) is moving, not just on a
circle, but also, simultaneously on the "bold curve" which is the
intersection of the torus and cylinder swept out by the action of the
double rotation. (See Figure 3.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure03-riemann67.gif"
height="307" width="350"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure03-riemann67.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"307\" width=\"350\" />

*Thus, extending Cusa's concept, the "cubic" magnitudes depend on a type
of quantity arising from the difference between the straight and two
distinct types of curves. It is a single quantity expressing a doubly
connected action.*

As Cusa, Leibniz, Gauss and Riemann all emphasized, such quantities are
determined not by any precise magnitude, but by the { *type, or species*
,}of incommensurability which expresses the quantity: a principle
identified in the last installment of this series, as a matter of
precise ambiguity.

As Cusa also states in { *De Possest* }:

CARDINAL: We know that we cannot obtain any numerical proportion between
the diagonal and the side of a square, since no two numbers can be
exhibited which are related to each other in precisely this way. Given
any two numbers, the relationship between them is either greater or
lesser than the relationship between the diameter and the side. And
given any two numbers, two other numbers can be found which are closer
to the relation in question. Hence, although it seems possible that
there are two precise numbers, this possibility is never actually
exhibited. (But the actualization *would be* the precise proportion, so
that the numbers would be related in this precise way.) The reason is
that unless there is exhibited a number which is neither even nor odd,
it will not be the number in question. But every number which we
conceive is, necessarily, even or odd (but not both). And so, we fail to
find the desired number. However, we see that precision *is* present in
that concept which expresses what is impossible for us to conceive.
Thus, we have to say that our concept cannot attain to the proportion
between the possibility and the actuality. For we have no common medium
by which to attain to the proportion between the possibility and the
actuality. For we have no common medium by which to attain to the
relationship, since the possibility is infinite and indeterminate,
whereas the actuality is finite and determined; and between these there
is no middle ground. But we see that these viz., possibility and
actuality are not distinct in God. And so, He is above our concept.
^[7](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part67.html#Footnote7)^

With Kepler's determination of the elliptical characteristic of the
planetary orbits, Cusa's insistence that physical action depends on such
precise ambiguities was given a new light. However, as we have developed
in earlier installments of this series, Kepler's identification of a new
type of ambiguity associated with elliptical motion (the "Kepler
Problem"), posed, for Leibniz, Gauss and Riemann, the existence of a
still higher type of quantity, than that identified merely by the
difference between the curved and the straight.

This is because elliptical motion is generated by a species of quantity
arising from a double incommensurability (the arc and the angle),
similar to the action expressed in the Archytas construction. (See
Figure 4.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure04-riemann67.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure04-riemann67.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

This is distinct from the quantities associated with merely circular
action which arise from a single difference between the straight and the
curved. (See Figure 5.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure05-riemann67.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure05-riemann67.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

Gauss showed, as we developed in the last installment of this series,
that such "elliptical" quantities are associated, not with the
arithmetic, harmonic, or geometric means, which arise from a circular or
hyperbolic action, but with a higher transcendental: the
*arithmetic-geometric mean* .

Because this type of magnitude arose out of Kepler's discovery of
elliptical motion, such magnitudes have historically been called "
*elliptical functions* ". But as the investigations of Gauss, Abel,
Jacobi and Riemann have all indicated, these functions are much more
universal, characterizing such physical action as exemplified by the
motion of a pendulum, a spinning top, or the rotation of the Earth.
Further, the discovery that these types of physical action depend on
such a higher transcendental, paved the way for Abel's discovery, and
Riemann's elaboration, of an extended domain of higher transcendentals
associated with the concept of hypergeometries.

This aspect of the spinning top's motion was a focus of mid-19 ^th^
century science, with Gauss, Riemann, Dirichlet, Jacobi, et al.,
producing extensive investigations of physical problems from this
*anti-Euclidean* standpoint. In reaction, the formalists tried to
resurrect the dead absolute space of Aristotle, Newton, Euler and Kant.
Most notable in this regard are the extensive 1895 lectures on the
motion of the spinning top produced by Felix Klein and Arnold
Sommerfeld. These lectures, which were published in four volumes
totaling almost one-thousand pages, carefully detail the physics of the
spinning top and its application in the field of astronomy, geodesy,
geomagnetism, and many other fields of physics. Yet, despite the very
interesting, and potentially useful results contained in these pages,
there is a devastating underlying assumption that opened the door to the
revival of the same Eleatic sophistries that Plato combatted, and which
destroyed Greek culture more than 2500 years earlier: *the existence of
absolute space* .

Klein himself proudly admitted this deficiency in his summary lectures
on the subject given in October 1896 at Princeton University. After
describing how the motion of the spinning top can be mathematically
characterized by elliptical functions, as Jacobi had previously
elaborated, Klein confessed:

*The transformation therefore represents a real free motion in
non-Euclidean space...*

I close the present lecture with two remarks.

First, *there is nothing essentially new in the considerations with
which we have been occupied thus far* . I have merely attempted to throw
a method already well known into the most convenient form for
application to mechanics.

Second, *the non-Euclidean geometry has no metaphysical significance
here or in the subsequent discussion* . It is used solely because it is
a convenient method of grouping in geometric form relations which must
otherwise remain hidden in formulas. (emphasis in the original.)
^[8](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part67.html#Footnote8)^

Klein's view expressed the epistemological degeneration that science and
society were undergoing at that time, under pressure from the
British-led oligarchy's reaction to the growing optimism associated with
the spread of the American system that followed Abraham Lincoln's
victory in the U.S. Civil War. Just as their Babylonian and Persian
ancestors pushed the idea of absolute space and time to counteract the
confidence in the power of ideas embodied in the Pythagorean science of
*Sphaerics* , the pessimists of the late nineteenth century desperately
tried to resuscitate this sophistry in reaction to what had appeared to
be its definitive burial by the combined work of Leibniz, Kaestner,
Gauss and Riemann. This effort is typified by the just described actions
of G.W.F. Hegel's grandson-in-law, Felix Klein. Klein's approach to
science, in conjunction with the work of Bertrand Russell, Ernst Mach,
Friedrich Nietzsche, et al., is paradigmatic of the degeneration which
paved the way for the emergence of the irrationality and pessimism in
science typified by the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum phenomena.
This spread of sophistry in science reflected, and fostered, the growing
disregard for truth that held sway over a twentieth century which, but
for the efforts of Franklin Delano Roosevelt's U.S.A., was dominated by
synarchism, economic depression, and war. The recognition of this
connection between the degeneration of science and society led Einstein
to lament, in a letter to Max Born, that his efforts to resist the
widespread acceptance of irrationality in science made him "as lonely as
Leibniz in his fight against Newton on absolute space."

Such disregard for truth reached a relative peak with the Baby Boomer
degeneration. But LaRouche's discoveries in the science of physical
economy, the rapid progress of the LaRouche Youth Movement in mastering
this, saner, anti-Euclidean approach to science, and the urgent
requirement to harness sub-nuclear and astrophysical processes, creates
the possibility, and the necessity, to apply the science of Cusa,
Kepler, Fermat, Leibniz, Gauss and Riemann, to the problems of modern
science and society. To aid that process, we must turn again to the
spinning top.

The Spinning Top and Hypergeometries

Despite Klein's insistence to the contrary, the anti-Euclidean nature of
the spinning top's dynamics has { *profound* } metaphysical
significance. In denying this, Klein employs the ancient sophist's
trick. By excising the physical dynamics of the top's motion from its
mathematical description, and equating its { *anti* }-Euclidean
characteristics with the sophist's { *non* }-Euclidean mathematics,
Klein surreptitiously assumes the existence of an { *a priori* }
absolute space in which the top moves. Once this is accepted, neither
the top's actual dynamics, nor the more fundamental implications, can be
discovered, as Klein readily admits. For Klein, only a mathematical
description can be given, which, like Ptolemy's, Copernicus's or Brahe's
models of the solar system, is not true, but merely one of mathematical
convenience. Like Euclid previously, Klein's approach seeks to codify
the results of an actual discovery while at the same time obfuscating
its creative source. But as Kepler emphasized, science should seek only
what is true, not what is convenient. Thus, the metaphysical
significance of the elliptical characteristic of the spinning top's
motion must be emphasized. To understand that significance we must turn
back to Cusa.

Cusa uses the metaphor of a top spinning with "infinite" velocity as an
image of the self-boundedness of the universe in which all possible
motion is "enfolded", and from which physical motion is "unfolded". As
he states this in { *De Possest* }:

CARDINAL: I want to say that as-enfolded-in-God all these things are
God; similarly, as-unfolded-in-the-created-world they are the world.
^[9](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part67.html#Footnote9)^

Contrary to his Aristotelean opponents, Cusa's notion of "unfolded"
physical motion is not separate from the principle from which it
unfolds. Thus the characteristics of the physical top spinning with
"finite" velocity reflect the characteristics of the universe as a
whole. Those characteristics, however, can not be investigated directly
in the "enfolded" form. Therefore Cusa adopts a Socratic approach to
this investigation:

CARDINAL: We need to presuppose, Abbot, what you have heard from me on
another occasion: viz., that there are three theoretical investigations.

1\. The lowest of these three is physics, which centers on nature and
examines inabstract forms which are subject to change. For nature is
form-in-matter; and so, in matter form is not abstract and is in
something other than itself; and, hence, it exists otherwise than it
does in itself. Therefore, it is continually being changed, or altered,
in accordance with the instability of the material. The soul, by the
senses and by reason, investigates this type of form.

2\. Another theoretical investigation is the investigation of the Form
which is completely abstract *absoluta* and completely stable--which is
divine and is free of all otherness and so is eternal and without any
change or variation. The soul, by itself and without images,
investigates this Form. The soul seeks it beyond all understanding and
learning--by its own highest acumen and simplicity, which some persons
call intellectuality.

3\. There is also a theoretical investigation which is in between these
two. It deals with inabstract forms which are, however, stable. (This
investigation is called mathematics.) For example, it deals with a
circle which, although it is free from corporeal and unstable material,
is not free from every subject and from all intelligible material. For
it does not deal with a circle as it is in a corruptible floor but as it
is in its own rational ground, or definition. And this theoretical
investigation is called *mathesis* or *disciplina* . For it is passed on
by way of learning. And in investigating it, the soul uses the intellect
together with the imagination. I have written elsewhere about these
points. ^[10](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part67.html#Footnote10)^

Taking Cusa's approach as our starting point, let us investigate the
physical motions of the spinning top from the more elaborated expression
of Leibniz, Gauss and Riemann. From this standpoint, the metaphysical
implications of the top's motion, which were shunned by Klein, become
most important, as they express the characteristic of the universe to be
an *anti-Euclidean self-bounded hypergeometric domain* .

Look again at the physical motion from the top. Unlike Cusa's
metaphorical top, the physical top spins with finite velocity and with
precession. The manifold of all possible such physical motions is
bounded by motion with maximum rotation and minimum precession to
minimum rotation and maximum precession. An actual spinning top will
move through this manifold as the effect of friction slows it down,
constantly changing the relationship between rotation and precession.

In 1758, Euler described the motion of the spinning top by constructing
mathematical formulas that assumed it was moving in an absolute,
Euclidean type space represented by three orthogonal rectilinear axes,
x, y, z. He then constructed a second set of axes, x', y', z' such that
the z' axis corresponded to the axis of rotation of the top. The
relationship between these two sets of axes could be described by the
three angles they formed with each other, which have become known as the
"Euler angles". Euler's formulas described the top's motion as a
function of these three angles, organized in a 3 x 3 matrix that
expressed the angular relationship of each coordinate axis to all the
others. Though it was possible, from this standpoint, to express the
relative position of these axes with each other, it was not possible to
express how these positions were changing with time. That is because the
relationship between time and position is a function of a non-linear
physical principle, not-Euclidean axioms. This relationship between time
and position gave rise to set of differential equations that Euler could
write down but could not solve, except for exceptional cases.

In 1849, Jacobi showed that if he rejected Euler's approach of trying to
describe the motion of the top in absolute space, and instead
investigated the nine relationships between the axes as a function of
the periodic time, the top's motion could expressed by elliptical
functions.

Klein took Jacobi's result and applied to it Gauss's and Riemann's
geometrical representation of elliptical functions. But, as noted above,
in rejecting the metaphysical significance of both Gauss's and Riemann's
idea of the complex domain, and the metaphysical significance that the
top's motion is expressed by an elliptical transcendental, Klein not
only missed the boat, he committed a fraud.

To investigate these metaphysical considerations, consider the motion of
the top from the standpoint of a Riemann surface.

First, consider the case of an ideal top spinning with a finite velocity
but no precession. Mapped onto a Riemann sphere, this motion would be
expressed by a simply-periodic rotation of the sphere around an axis.
Such a rotation corresponds to a simple transcendental function such as
the circular, hyperbolic, or more generally, exponential functions. (See
Figure 6.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure06-riemann67.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure06-riemann67.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

These functions can be defined, inversely, by what Gauss called their
"modular" function. In the case of these simple transcendentals, the
modulus of periodicity is an interval of one rotation, or 2Pi. Each
period is represented on the Riemann surface as a strip whose width is
2Pi. (See Figure 7.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure07-riemann67.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure07-riemann67.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

In this simple modular function the addition of a multiple of 2Pi to any
strip maps it onto a congruent region.

This type of modular function is a special case of a complex function
that Gauss discovered, but, since he never published his results, they
have come to be called "Moebius transformations" after his student
Ferdinand Moebius who elaborated their characteristics. These Moebius
transformations map a Riemann sphere onto itself. (See Figure 8
a,b,c,d.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure08a-riemann67.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure08a-riemann67.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure08b-riemann67.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure08b-riemann67.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure08c-riemann67.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure08c-riemann67.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure08d-riemann67.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure08d-riemann67.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

The unique type of Moebius transformation, discovered by Gauss, maps the
sphere onto itself without stretching, are the type associated with
elliptic functions. (See Figure 9.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure09-riemann67.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure09-riemann67.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

The only variation among the modular functions associated with these
simple transcendentals is the direction of the modulus of periodicity
and the position of the branch points. From this standpoint it is easy
to see, geometrically, why the circular and hyperbolic functions can be
expressed by the exponentials, as opposed to the convoluted formalism
that Euler used.

But just as the orbits of the planets are not circular, neither is the
true motion of a top. An actual top, rotating with respect to a
gravitational potential, has both rotation and precession, each with a
distinct, but connected periodicity. As discussed above, this type of
doubly periodic motion is associated, in general, with elliptical
functions. This change from a simply periodic transcendental to a doubly
periodic one, like the change from line to surface and surface to
volume, is discontinuous. (See Figure 10.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure10-riemann67.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure10-riemann67.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

There is no middle ground between simple and elliptical transcendentals.

Now consider a top rotating at a constant speed. This motion maintains a
constant relationship between its angular rotation and its precession,
corresponding to a unique elliptical function. This elliptical function
can be expressed by mapping this motion onto a Riemann sphere using
Gauss's form of Moebius transformations. (See Figure 11.).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure11-riemann67.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure11-riemann67.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

If the relationship between the angular spin and precession were to
change, this new motion would define a different, but also, unique,
elliptical function. Thus, the uniqueness of an elliptical function can
be expressed by the ratio of the two periods.

Each unique elliptical function corresponds to a unique *modular*
function in which the modulus is expressed as a parallelogram whose
shape reflects the ratio of the periods. (See Figure 12.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure12-riemann67.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure12-riemann67.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

Riemann considered this parallelogram to be the map of a torus. (See
Figure 13.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure13-riemann67.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure13-riemann67.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

If the ratio of the periods is small the shape of the torus is fat. If
the ratio of the periods is large, then the corresponding torus will be
a different shape. (See Figure 14.).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure14-riemann67.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure14-riemann67.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

Just as the circular and hyperbolic functions can be expressed by the
exponential function, the ratio of the periods of an elliptical function
can be expressed by a hypergeometric function of the type that Gauss
discovered with respect to the arithmetic-geometric mean. (See [Riemann
for Anti-Dummies Part 66](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part66.html) .)
^[11](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part67.html#Footnote11)^

But for a spinning top whose motion is changing, such as due to friction
at the tip, the ratio between the periods is also always changing. Thus
the only appropriate way to characterize the general motion of a
spinning top is with respect to the entire manifold of all possible
elliptical functions. This entire manifold can be expressed by what
Gauss and Riemann identified as { *the elliptical modular function* }.

Gauss showed that though each unique elliptic function is associated
with a unique modular function, there is a unique set of Moebius
transformations that is common to all elliptical functions. This set
corresponds to the six different variations of the Moebius
transformation z+1 and -1/z. Repeated application of these
transformations produces a six-fold cycle. This is the same six-fold
cycle associated with the projective invariance of the cross-ratio. (See
[Riemann for Anti-Dummies Part
65](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part65.html) .)

Gauss developed the first image of the elliptical modular function in
his investigation of the arithmetic-geometric mean. (See Figure 15.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure15-riemann67.gif"
height="432" width="691"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure15-riemann67.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"432\" width=\"691\" />

That image was further elaborated by Riemann in his lectures on Gauss's
hypergeometric function. (See Figure 16.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure16-riemann67.jpg"
height="453" width="400"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure16-riemann67.jpg\"
alt=\"\" height=\"453\" width=\"400\" />

A computer generated image, rotated by 90 degrees can be seen in Figure
17.

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure17-riemann67.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure17-riemann67.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

In the latter picture, each colored region is bounded by three circular
arcs. The blue region marked "z" contains the fundamental period ratio
for all possible elliptical functions. For this reason, Gauss called
this region, "the fundamental region". This blue region is mapped onto
each of the other regions by the successive application of the Moebius
transformations z+1 and -1/z. Under each transformation, the fundamental
period of a specific elliptical function is mapped to all its congruent
ones.

Thus, Gauss's and Riemann's map express, as an image, the { *idea* } of
the manifold of all possible elliptical functions. The top's motion must
be considered as a pathway within this elliptical manifold. This image,
however, must be understood, as Cusa would indicate: it is only a {
*mean* } between the physical form and the true idea.

There is still more to the top's motion that we have, up until now,
ignored: the motion of the tip itself. If the tip is stationary, the
spinning top's motion can be characterized as a pathway in an { *anti*
}-Euclidean elliptical manifold. But if the top's tip is moving, that
adds an additional action to the overall motion of the top. Such
additional action is characterized, not by elliptical, but by
*hyper-elliptical* functions.

Such hyper-elliptical functions, Riemann showed, are expressed by a
different type of modulus and a different type of modular function. (See
Figure 18.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure18-riemann67.gif"
height="636" width="636"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure18-riemann67.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"636\" width=\"636\" />

Whereas the elliptical modular functions are associated with a Moebius
transformation that maps a sphere (which is self-bounded and positively
curved) without stretching, the hyper-elliptical modular functions are
expressed by a unique type of Moebius transformation that maps a
self-bounded negatively curved surface without stretching.

At this point in our investigation the example of the simple spinning
top becomes an insufficient example of a physical expression of still
higher forms of hypergeometries. But if we follow the top's motion, as
Riemann indicated, into the astrophysical and microphysical domains,
such higher forms of hypergeometries emerge. For example, consider the
actual motion of the Earth, around its axis, around the Sun and
precession; or the motion within and among the galaxies; or the motions
in the sub-atomic domains indicated by the experimental evidence of
physical chemistry.

This succession from simple transcendental, to elliptical, to
hyper-elliptical illustrates another significant metaphysical principle.
Each species of transcendental function is bounded, not on its exterior,
but everywhere, by the characteristics of the principle that it
encompasses. The modular function for each species of transcendental
expresses this boundedness, as a unique type of quantization. Yet there
is another, higher form of quantization. This is associated with the
discontinuities between each species of transcendentals. The boundedness
of this "species of species" expresses nothing less than the
self-boundedness of the universe itself.

These types of considerations led Riemann to lay the foundations of an
even broader concept of multiply-extended manifolds, both in general
form, as in his 1854 habilitation dissertation, and in some specific
physical examples, such as his studies of heat or the motion of a fluid
ellipsoid, which will be explored in future installments of this series.

Such examples are the starting point from which to approach the pending
problems of physical science. But such efforts will not succeed, as
Riemann noted in his habilitation paper, unless "this task shall not be
hindered by too restricted conceptions, and that progress in perceiving
the connection of things shall not be obstructed by the prejudices of
tradition".

The most pernicious of such traditions is the belief in absolute space.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

NOTES

1\. []{#Footnote1} Plato, Parmenides 156d-e translated by Harold N.
Fowler, www.perseus.tufts.edu

2\. []{#Footnote2} Plato, Republic Book 4, 436d-437a, translated by Paul
Shorey, [www.perseus.tufts.edu](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/)

3\. []{#Footnote3} Nicholas of Cusa, De Possest 14, translated by Jasper
Hopkins, <http://cla.umn.edu/sites/hopkins>

4\. []{#Footnote4} Nicholas of Cusa, Op. Cit. 19-20

5\. []{#Footnote5} Plato, Timaeus 37d; 38b; translated W.R.M. Lamb
[www.perseus.tufts.edu](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/)

6\. []{#Footnote6} The actual shape of the Earth is quite complex, and
so its motion is more complex than a spinning top. In conjunction with
Dirichlet, Riemann studied this phenomenon, producing a treatise about
it on the subject of the motion of a fluid ellipsoid. This work contains
some important results of more general significance which will be
treated in a future pedagogical.

7\. []{#Footnote7} De Possest 42, Op. Cit.

8\. []{#Footnote8} Felix Klein, The Mathematical Theory of the Top,
Charles Scribner's Sons, New York, 1897.

9\. []{#Footnote9} De Possest 9, Op. Cit.

10\. []{#Footnote10} De Possest 63, Op. Cit.

11\. []{#Footnote11} These functions were called "theta" functions by
Jacobi and Riemann. As distinct from the exponential functions whose
proportionality of growth is constant, the "theta" functions are
characterized by a proportionality of growth that is changing
exponentially. An example of a type of "theta" function are the
functions P and Q which Gauss used to express the arithmetic-geometric
mean. These functions are defined by a series whose exponents are
squares. Consequently, the proportionality of growth of these series is
always increasing, specifically, by the odd powers.
:::

::: {.addtoany_share_save_container .addtoany_content_bottom}
::: {.a2a_kit .a2a_kit_size_32 .addtoany_list a2a-url="http://lymcanada.org/67/" a2a-title="Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 67 :  A View From The Top"}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F67%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2067%20%3A%20%20A%20View%20From%20The%20Top "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F67%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2067%20%3A%20%20A%20View%20From%20The%20Top "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/google_plus?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F67%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2067%20%3A%20%20A%20View%20From%20The%20Top "Google+"){.a2a_button_google_plus}
[](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd .addtoany_share_save}
:::
:::
:::

[ [ Posted on ]{.screen-reader-text} [February 20, 2010 February 24,
2019](http://lymcanada.org/67/) ]{.posted-on} [ [ [ Author
]{.screen-reader-text} [Bruce
Director](http://lymcanada.org/author/bdirector/){.url .fn .n} ]{.author
.vcard} ]{.byline} [ [ Categories ]{.screen-reader-text}
[EN](http://lymcanada.org/category/en/) , [Riemmann for
Anti-Dummies](http://lymcanada.org/category/science-1/c132-riemmann-for-anti-dummies/)
]{.cat-links}

::: post-thumbnail
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.attachment-post-thumbnail
.size-post-thumbnail .wp-post-image width="243" height="230"
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part67_files_afigure01-riemann67.jpg"}

\<img width=\"243\" height=\"230\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part67_files_afigure01-riemann67.jpg\"
class=\"attachment-post-thumbnail size-post-thumbnail wp-post-image\"
alt=\"\" />
:::

::: entry-header
# Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 67 : A View From The Top {#riemann-for-anti-dummies-part-67-a-view-from-the-top-1 .entry-title}
:::

::: entry-content
::: pf-content
August 28, 2006 (6:25pm)

## The View From the Top

by Bruce Director

For more than three millennia the motion of a spinning top has been a
source of great amusement for children, scientists, and philosophers. A
careful examination of its motion provides insight into the underlying
dynamics of the universe and exposes the fraud of absolute space. Plato
took great delight in the embarrassment the top's motion caused his
Eleatic and Sophist adversaries, who argued that motion and change did
not really exist. Nicholas of Cusa enjoyed the image of a spinning top
as a beautiful expression of the universe's self-boundedness. From a
Riemannian standpoint, that same simple spinning top is still a great
source of fun, unfolding Cusa's concept into the domain of
hypergeometries, and twisting Plato's modern adversaries into gnarled
knots. [ ]{#more-1176}

Spin a top or a gyroscope. Watch its motion carefully. What moves?
Relative to what? What remains at rest? Relative to what? How do those
motions and non-motions change and interact? What do these observed
motions indicate about the characteristics of the universe itself,
including the characteristics of the human mind?

This latter question, which most occupied Plato and Cusa, is what
concerns us in the following pedagogical discussion. To set the stage,
let us first look at their view of the top.

Plato introduces the spinning top in the fourth book of the { *Republic*
}, as a refutation of the attempts of the Eleatics and Sophists to deny
the power of the human mind to comprehend the physical universe, by
promulgating fallacies of composition typified by Zeno's or Parmenides'
paradox. Such frauds argued that an inherent contradiction existed
between thought and physics, which made it impossible for the human mind
to know anything about the physical world. This contradiction, the
Sophists maintained, could be expressed by investigating motion. Their
argument went, that since at every instant a moving body is changing, it
must be always simultaneously at motion and at rest. Since this is not
possible, either motion does not exist, or, if it does, our minds are
incapable of comprehending it. As Parmenides states this in Plato's
dialogue:

"For the instant seems to indicate a something from which there is a
change in one direction or the other. For it does not change from rest
while it is still at rest, nor from motion while it is still moving; but
there is this strange instantaneous nature, something interposed between
motion and rest, not existing in any time, and into this and out from
this that which is in motion changes into rest and that which is at rest
changes into motion....Then the one, if it is at rest and in motion,
must change in each direction; for that is the only way in which it can
do both. But in changing, it changes instantaneously, and when it
changes it can be in no time, and at that instant it will be neither in
motion nor at rest."
^[1](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part67.html#Footnote1)^

But Plato recognized the trick. The real target of the Eleatic fallacy
of composition was not the physical existence of motion, but the idea
that the human mind could know anything about the physical universe. The
real fraud, therefore, is not stated in the argument, which flows quite
logically, but in the unstated underlying assumption: that all physical
motion exists within an absolute space, infinitely extended,
rectilinearly, as described later by Euclid, and an absolute time
ticking away according to some great time piece that exists, prior to,
and outside, the universe itself. Plato cites the spinning top to show
that it is physical motion that defines space and time, not, as the
Eleatics maintained, { *a priori* } absolute space and time that defines
motion :

Then if the disputant should carry the jest still further with the
subtlety that tops at any rate stand still as a whole, at the same time
they are in motion, when with the peg fixed in one point they revolve,
and that the same is true of any other case of circular motion about the
same spot--we should reject the statement on the ground that the repose
and the movement in such cases were not in relation to the same parts of
the objects, but we would say that there was a straight line and a
circumference in them and that in respect of the straight line they are
standing still, since they do not incline to either side, but in respect
of the circumference they move in a circle; but that when as they
revolve they incline the perpendicular to right of left or forward or
back, then they are in no wise at rest....No such remarks then will
disconcert us or any whit the more make us believe that it is ever
possible for the same thing at the same time in the same respect and the
same relation to suffer, be, or do opposites".
^[2](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part67.html#Footnote2)^

Cusa took Plato's argument further, in a dialogue which he called by a
Latin word which he inveneted: {" *De Possest* "}. As Cusa explains it:

For let us agree that there is a single word which signifies by a very
simple signification as much as is signified by the compound expression
"Possibility exists" (" *posse est"* )--meaning that possibility itself
exists. Now, because what exists exists actually: the
possibility-to-be-exists insofar as the possibility-to-be is actual.
Suppose we call this { *possest* }. All things are enfolded in it and {
*possest* } is a sufficiently approximate name for God, according to our
human concept of Him.
^[3](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part67.html#Footnote3)^

To illustrate this concept Cusa introduces the metaphor of a top
spinning with "infinite" velocity (circle *bc* ) inside a fixed circle (
*de* ). (See Figure 1.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure01-riemann67.jpg"
height="230" width="243"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure01-riemann67.jpg\"
alt=\"\" height=\"230\" width=\"243\" />

CARDINAL: Let it suffice, that by means of this image and
metaphorically, we are somehow able to see how it is that (if the circle
*bc* were illustrative of eternity and the circle *de* were illustrative
of time) the following propositions are not self-contradictory: "that
eternity as a whole is at once present at every point of time"; "that
God as the Beginning and the End is at once and as a whole present in
all things" and so on for other such propositions.

BERNARD: Things which are separated for us are not at all separated in
God. For example, *d* and *e* are separated by that diameter of the
circle of which they are opposite points. But there is no such
separation in God; for when *b* comes to *d* , it is at the same time
also at *e* . Similarly, all the things which are separated in time in
our world are present before God. And all the things which in our world
are separated as opposites exist conjointly in God. And all the things
which *here* are different are *there* identical.
^[4](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part67.html#Footnote4)^

For Plato and Cusa the spinning top was not merely a toy. Its motion
reflects, in microcosm, the movement of the physical universe, such as
the motion of the heavenly bodies, and the characteristics of the
metaphysical principles governing that motion. Our notions of time and
space are not absolute. They are inseparable from this physical motion.

As Plato describes this in the { *Timaeus* }:

Accordingly, seeing that that Model is an eternal Living Creature, He
set about making this Universe, so far as He could, of a like kind. But
inasmuch as the nature of the Living Creature was eternal, this quality
it was impossible to attach in its entirety to what is generated;
wherefore He planned to make a movable image of Eternity, and, as he set
in order the Heaven, of that Eternity which abides in unity He made an
eternal image, moving according to number, even that which we have named
Time...

Time, then, came into existence along with the Heaven...
^[5](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part67.html#Footnote5)^

For at least the last three thousand years, all progress in civilization
has occurred by rejecting the sophistry of absolute space and time, and
all periods of regress and stagnation, including our own, have been
characterized by the popular acceptance of some notion of absolute space
and time. This is why every great scientist, from Plato, to Philo, to
Augustine, to Cusa, to Kepler, Fermat, Leibniz, Gauss, Riemann and
Einstein, have all polemicized against the Eleatic sophistry of absolute
space and time. Once science, or the population as a whole, accepts the
idea of absolute space and time, they become suckers for such fallacies
of composition as, "motion does not exist", or, "wealth is derived from
money".

But something else is posed by Plato's and Cusa's metaphor of the
spinning top. The self-boundedness of the universe is expressed in
physical action by harmonic characteristics, or what modern science
would call the *quantization of space-time* . Such quantized harmonic
characteristics are exemplified by the uniqueness of the five regular
solids, Kepler's harmonic principles of planetary motion, the periodic
and crystallographic characteristics of physical chemistry, and Planck's
quantum of action.

Such quantized harmonic characteristics, though recognized much earlier,
could not be adequately understood, however, until Gauss's development
of the complex domain, and Riemann's elaboration of it through his work
on Abelian and hypergeometric functions. For this, we again turn to the
spinning top.

The Spinning Top and Elliptic Functions

Look again at the spinning top without the prejudices of Euclidean type
notions of space and time. Stand a top on its tip. What is its motion
when it is not spinning? A rotation in the direction of the pull of
gravity. What is its motion when it is spinning? This is more complex.
For the top is not spinning in absolute space. It is spinning with
respect to a gravitational potential. That means that the top's motion
is the effect of the interaction of the characteristics of its spin and
the gravitational potential.

This combined action produces a single complex motion expressed by the
connected motion of the top around its axis and the motion of the axis
itself. This latter motion is called precession, and is, in general,
incommensurable, with the top's rotation around its axis.

Were the top to be perfectly symmetrical and spinning so that its axis
of rotation were perpendicular to the pull of gravity, the precession
would be zero. But, as Cusa notes in { *De Docta Ignorantia* } there is
no perfect circle, (or symmetrical top) in the physical universe.
Because of this uneven distribution of the top's mass, both gravity and
the spin of the top will be acting together on the top's motion.
Consequently, a real spinning top will have both rotation and
precession. This motion is a microcosm of the Earth's motion, whose
rotation produces a non-spherical shape. Consequently, the Earth
exhibits precession which is observed as the approximately 26,000 year
cycle of the procession of the equinoxes.
^[6](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part67.html#Footnote6)^

Thus, the motion of the spinning top is neither the motion { *around* }
the axis, nor the motion { *of* } the axis, but the { *connected* }
motion of both, produced by the { *connected* } action of rotation and
gravity. Doubly connected action of this type, since the discoveries of
Gauss and Riemann, has been characterized by what have come to be called
{ *elliptic functions* }.

Like Kepler's planetary orbits, the top's motion is not occurring in the
absolute Euclidean-type space of Newton, Euler, Kant, et al. It is the
physical principles governing the motion which define the
characteristics of space and time. For the planetary orbits, Kepler
emphasized, it is the harmonic characteristics of the solar system that
define the path of the planet and the motion of the planet itself which
defines time. The characteristics of the governing physical principle
emerge, in the discontinuity between determining the time as a function
of the planet's position and determining the planet's position as a
function of time . (The Kepler Problem.)

Similarly with the spinning top. It is when the position of the top is
defined as a function of time, determined by the motion of the top
itself, that the elliptical function arises. { *Thus, the motion of the
spinning top is defining a physically determined anti-Euclidean
space-time* }of the type identified by Kepler, Leibniz, Gauss, Riemann,
and in a somewhat weaker form, by Planck and Einstein.

Though such elliptic functions, are associated by name with an ellipse,
they are nevertheless much more universal. They are not derived from the
formal geometrical properties of an ellipse, but from the metaphysical
implications of the physical existence of non-uniform motion,
exemplified by Kepler's determination of the elliptical nature of the
planetary orbits. Though these functions have been treated in some
detail in previous installments of this series, we take a quick spin
through the history of their development, in order to keep the essential
concepts clear and fresh in the mind of the reader.

The earliest recorded expression of what modern physics would recognize
as an elliptical function is Archytas's construction for determining two
geometric means between two extremes. The "elliptical" characteristic of
this construction becomes most apparent when contrasted with the general
form of the construction of one geometric mean between two extremes.

In the latter case, the general construction for generating the
proportions of one geometric mean between two extremes is expressed by
the rotation of a right-angle in a semi-circle. (See Figure 2.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure02-riemann67.gif"
height="233" width="400"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure02-riemann67.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"233\" width=\"400\" />

In this case, the magnitude is generated by the connected relationship
of the { *non-uniform* } motion of a point on a circle ( *P* ) and a
point on a line ( *Q* ). The non-uniformity of this motion is intrinsic
to the construction. If the motion of (P) is uniform, the motion of (Q)
is non-uniform. If the motion of (Q) is uniform, the motion of (P) is
non-uniform.

*Thus, the magnitude that has the power to create one geometric mean in
a given proportion, is a type of quantity which Cusa would identify as
arising from the difference between the straight and the curved.*

However, as the Archytas construction demonstrates, the magnitude that
has the power to generate two geometric means between two extremes,
depends on rotating that circle in which one geometric mean is
generated. In this case, the point (Q) is moving, not just on a line,
but simultaneously on a circle. Point (P) is moving, not just on a
circle, but also, simultaneously on the "bold curve" which is the
intersection of the torus and cylinder swept out by the action of the
double rotation. (See Figure 3.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure03-riemann67.gif"
height="307" width="350"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure03-riemann67.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"307\" width=\"350\" />

*Thus, extending Cusa's concept, the "cubic" magnitudes depend on a type
of quantity arising from the difference between the straight and two
distinct types of curves. It is a single quantity expressing a doubly
connected action.*

As Cusa, Leibniz, Gauss and Riemann all emphasized, such quantities are
determined not by any precise magnitude, but by the { *type, or species*
,}of incommensurability which expresses the quantity: a principle
identified in the last installment of this series, as a matter of
precise ambiguity.

As Cusa also states in { *De Possest* }:

CARDINAL: We know that we cannot obtain any numerical proportion between
the diagonal and the side of a square, since no two numbers can be
exhibited which are related to each other in precisely this way. Given
any two numbers, the relationship between them is either greater or
lesser than the relationship between the diameter and the side. And
given any two numbers, two other numbers can be found which are closer
to the relation in question. Hence, although it seems possible that
there are two precise numbers, this possibility is never actually
exhibited. (But the actualization *would be* the precise proportion, so
that the numbers would be related in this precise way.) The reason is
that unless there is exhibited a number which is neither even nor odd,
it will not be the number in question. But every number which we
conceive is, necessarily, even or odd (but not both). And so, we fail to
find the desired number. However, we see that precision *is* present in
that concept which expresses what is impossible for us to conceive.
Thus, we have to say that our concept cannot attain to the proportion
between the possibility and the actuality. For we have no common medium
by which to attain to the proportion between the possibility and the
actuality. For we have no common medium by which to attain to the
relationship, since the possibility is infinite and indeterminate,
whereas the actuality is finite and determined; and between these there
is no middle ground. But we see that these viz., possibility and
actuality are not distinct in God. And so, He is above our concept.
^[7](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part67.html#Footnote7)^

With Kepler's determination of the elliptical characteristic of the
planetary orbits, Cusa's insistence that physical action depends on such
precise ambiguities was given a new light. However, as we have developed
in earlier installments of this series, Kepler's identification of a new
type of ambiguity associated with elliptical motion (the "Kepler
Problem"), posed, for Leibniz, Gauss and Riemann, the existence of a
still higher type of quantity, than that identified merely by the
difference between the curved and the straight.

This is because elliptical motion is generated by a species of quantity
arising from a double incommensurability (the arc and the angle),
similar to the action expressed in the Archytas construction. (See
Figure 4.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure04-riemann67.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure04-riemann67.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

This is distinct from the quantities associated with merely circular
action which arise from a single difference between the straight and the
curved. (See Figure 5.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure05-riemann67.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure05-riemann67.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

Gauss showed, as we developed in the last installment of this series,
that such "elliptical" quantities are associated, not with the
arithmetic, harmonic, or geometric means, which arise from a circular or
hyperbolic action, but with a higher transcendental: the
*arithmetic-geometric mean* .

Because this type of magnitude arose out of Kepler's discovery of
elliptical motion, such magnitudes have historically been called "
*elliptical functions* ". But as the investigations of Gauss, Abel,
Jacobi and Riemann have all indicated, these functions are much more
universal, characterizing such physical action as exemplified by the
motion of a pendulum, a spinning top, or the rotation of the Earth.
Further, the discovery that these types of physical action depend on
such a higher transcendental, paved the way for Abel's discovery, and
Riemann's elaboration, of an extended domain of higher transcendentals
associated with the concept of hypergeometries.

This aspect of the spinning top's motion was a focus of mid-19 ^th^
century science, with Gauss, Riemann, Dirichlet, Jacobi, et al.,
producing extensive investigations of physical problems from this
*anti-Euclidean* standpoint. In reaction, the formalists tried to
resurrect the dead absolute space of Aristotle, Newton, Euler and Kant.
Most notable in this regard are the extensive 1895 lectures on the
motion of the spinning top produced by Felix Klein and Arnold
Sommerfeld. These lectures, which were published in four volumes
totaling almost one-thousand pages, carefully detail the physics of the
spinning top and its application in the field of astronomy, geodesy,
geomagnetism, and many other fields of physics. Yet, despite the very
interesting, and potentially useful results contained in these pages,
there is a devastating underlying assumption that opened the door to the
revival of the same Eleatic sophistries that Plato combatted, and which
destroyed Greek culture more than 2500 years earlier: *the existence of
absolute space* .

Klein himself proudly admitted this deficiency in his summary lectures
on the subject given in October 1896 at Princeton University. After
describing how the motion of the spinning top can be mathematically
characterized by elliptical functions, as Jacobi had previously
elaborated, Klein confessed:

*The transformation therefore represents a real free motion in
non-Euclidean space...*

I close the present lecture with two remarks.

First, *there is nothing essentially new in the considerations with
which we have been occupied thus far* . I have merely attempted to throw
a method already well known into the most convenient form for
application to mechanics.

Second, *the non-Euclidean geometry has no metaphysical significance
here or in the subsequent discussion* . It is used solely because it is
a convenient method of grouping in geometric form relations which must
otherwise remain hidden in formulas. (emphasis in the original.)
^[8](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part67.html#Footnote8)^

Klein's view expressed the epistemological degeneration that science and
society were undergoing at that time, under pressure from the
British-led oligarchy's reaction to the growing optimism associated with
the spread of the American system that followed Abraham Lincoln's
victory in the U.S. Civil War. Just as their Babylonian and Persian
ancestors pushed the idea of absolute space and time to counteract the
confidence in the power of ideas embodied in the Pythagorean science of
*Sphaerics* , the pessimists of the late nineteenth century desperately
tried to resuscitate this sophistry in reaction to what had appeared to
be its definitive burial by the combined work of Leibniz, Kaestner,
Gauss and Riemann. This effort is typified by the just described actions
of G.W.F. Hegel's grandson-in-law, Felix Klein. Klein's approach to
science, in conjunction with the work of Bertrand Russell, Ernst Mach,
Friedrich Nietzsche, et al., is paradigmatic of the degeneration which
paved the way for the emergence of the irrationality and pessimism in
science typified by the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum phenomena.
This spread of sophistry in science reflected, and fostered, the growing
disregard for truth that held sway over a twentieth century which, but
for the efforts of Franklin Delano Roosevelt's U.S.A., was dominated by
synarchism, economic depression, and war. The recognition of this
connection between the degeneration of science and society led Einstein
to lament, in a letter to Max Born, that his efforts to resist the
widespread acceptance of irrationality in science made him "as lonely as
Leibniz in his fight against Newton on absolute space."

Such disregard for truth reached a relative peak with the Baby Boomer
degeneration. But LaRouche's discoveries in the science of physical
economy, the rapid progress of the LaRouche Youth Movement in mastering
this, saner, anti-Euclidean approach to science, and the urgent
requirement to harness sub-nuclear and astrophysical processes, creates
the possibility, and the necessity, to apply the science of Cusa,
Kepler, Fermat, Leibniz, Gauss and Riemann, to the problems of modern
science and society. To aid that process, we must turn again to the
spinning top.

The Spinning Top and Hypergeometries

Despite Klein's insistence to the contrary, the anti-Euclidean nature of
the spinning top's dynamics has { *profound* } metaphysical
significance. In denying this, Klein employs the ancient sophist's
trick. By excising the physical dynamics of the top's motion from its
mathematical description, and equating its { *anti* }-Euclidean
characteristics with the sophist's { *non* }-Euclidean mathematics,
Klein surreptitiously assumes the existence of an { *a priori* }
absolute space in which the top moves. Once this is accepted, neither
the top's actual dynamics, nor the more fundamental implications, can be
discovered, as Klein readily admits. For Klein, only a mathematical
description can be given, which, like Ptolemy's, Copernicus's or Brahe's
models of the solar system, is not true, but merely one of mathematical
convenience. Like Euclid previously, Klein's approach seeks to codify
the results of an actual discovery while at the same time obfuscating
its creative source. But as Kepler emphasized, science should seek only
what is true, not what is convenient. Thus, the metaphysical
significance of the elliptical characteristic of the spinning top's
motion must be emphasized. To understand that significance we must turn
back to Cusa.

Cusa uses the metaphor of a top spinning with "infinite" velocity as an
image of the self-boundedness of the universe in which all possible
motion is "enfolded", and from which physical motion is "unfolded". As
he states this in { *De Possest* }:

CARDINAL: I want to say that as-enfolded-in-God all these things are
God; similarly, as-unfolded-in-the-created-world they are the world.
^[9](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part67.html#Footnote9)^

Contrary to his Aristotelean opponents, Cusa's notion of "unfolded"
physical motion is not separate from the principle from which it
unfolds. Thus the characteristics of the physical top spinning with
"finite" velocity reflect the characteristics of the universe as a
whole. Those characteristics, however, can not be investigated directly
in the "enfolded" form. Therefore Cusa adopts a Socratic approach to
this investigation:

CARDINAL: We need to presuppose, Abbot, what you have heard from me on
another occasion: viz., that there are three theoretical investigations.

1\. The lowest of these three is physics, which centers on nature and
examines inabstract forms which are subject to change. For nature is
form-in-matter; and so, in matter form is not abstract and is in
something other than itself; and, hence, it exists otherwise than it
does in itself. Therefore, it is continually being changed, or altered,
in accordance with the instability of the material. The soul, by the
senses and by reason, investigates this type of form.

2\. Another theoretical investigation is the investigation of the Form
which is completely abstract *absoluta* and completely stable--which is
divine and is free of all otherness and so is eternal and without any
change or variation. The soul, by itself and without images,
investigates this Form. The soul seeks it beyond all understanding and
learning--by its own highest acumen and simplicity, which some persons
call intellectuality.

3\. There is also a theoretical investigation which is in between these
two. It deals with inabstract forms which are, however, stable. (This
investigation is called mathematics.) For example, it deals with a
circle which, although it is free from corporeal and unstable material,
is not free from every subject and from all intelligible material. For
it does not deal with a circle as it is in a corruptible floor but as it
is in its own rational ground, or definition. And this theoretical
investigation is called *mathesis* or *disciplina* . For it is passed on
by way of learning. And in investigating it, the soul uses the intellect
together with the imagination. I have written elsewhere about these
points. ^[10](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part67.html#Footnote10)^

Taking Cusa's approach as our starting point, let us investigate the
physical motions of the spinning top from the more elaborated expression
of Leibniz, Gauss and Riemann. From this standpoint, the metaphysical
implications of the top's motion, which were shunned by Klein, become
most important, as they express the characteristic of the universe to be
an *anti-Euclidean self-bounded hypergeometric domain* .

Look again at the physical motion from the top. Unlike Cusa's
metaphorical top, the physical top spins with finite velocity and with
precession. The manifold of all possible such physical motions is
bounded by motion with maximum rotation and minimum precession to
minimum rotation and maximum precession. An actual spinning top will
move through this manifold as the effect of friction slows it down,
constantly changing the relationship between rotation and precession.

In 1758, Euler described the motion of the spinning top by constructing
mathematical formulas that assumed it was moving in an absolute,
Euclidean type space represented by three orthogonal rectilinear axes,
x, y, z. He then constructed a second set of axes, x', y', z' such that
the z' axis corresponded to the axis of rotation of the top. The
relationship between these two sets of axes could be described by the
three angles they formed with each other, which have become known as the
"Euler angles". Euler's formulas described the top's motion as a
function of these three angles, organized in a 3 x 3 matrix that
expressed the angular relationship of each coordinate axis to all the
others. Though it was possible, from this standpoint, to express the
relative position of these axes with each other, it was not possible to
express how these positions were changing with time. That is because the
relationship between time and position is a function of a non-linear
physical principle, not-Euclidean axioms. This relationship between time
and position gave rise to set of differential equations that Euler could
write down but could not solve, except for exceptional cases.

In 1849, Jacobi showed that if he rejected Euler's approach of trying to
describe the motion of the top in absolute space, and instead
investigated the nine relationships between the axes as a function of
the periodic time, the top's motion could expressed by elliptical
functions.

Klein took Jacobi's result and applied to it Gauss's and Riemann's
geometrical representation of elliptical functions. But, as noted above,
in rejecting the metaphysical significance of both Gauss's and Riemann's
idea of the complex domain, and the metaphysical significance that the
top's motion is expressed by an elliptical transcendental, Klein not
only missed the boat, he committed a fraud.

To investigate these metaphysical considerations, consider the motion of
the top from the standpoint of a Riemann surface.

First, consider the case of an ideal top spinning with a finite velocity
but no precession. Mapped onto a Riemann sphere, this motion would be
expressed by a simply-periodic rotation of the sphere around an axis.
Such a rotation corresponds to a simple transcendental function such as
the circular, hyperbolic, or more generally, exponential functions. (See
Figure 6.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure06-riemann67.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure06-riemann67.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

These functions can be defined, inversely, by what Gauss called their
"modular" function. In the case of these simple transcendentals, the
modulus of periodicity is an interval of one rotation, or 2Pi. Each
period is represented on the Riemann surface as a strip whose width is
2Pi. (See Figure 7.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure07-riemann67.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure07-riemann67.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

In this simple modular function the addition of a multiple of 2Pi to any
strip maps it onto a congruent region.

This type of modular function is a special case of a complex function
that Gauss discovered, but, since he never published his results, they
have come to be called "Moebius transformations" after his student
Ferdinand Moebius who elaborated their characteristics. These Moebius
transformations map a Riemann sphere onto itself. (See Figure 8
a,b,c,d.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure08a-riemann67.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure08a-riemann67.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure08b-riemann67.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure08b-riemann67.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure08c-riemann67.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure08c-riemann67.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure08d-riemann67.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure08d-riemann67.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

The unique type of Moebius transformation, discovered by Gauss, maps the
sphere onto itself without stretching, are the type associated with
elliptic functions. (See Figure 9.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure09-riemann67.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure09-riemann67.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

The only variation among the modular functions associated with these
simple transcendentals is the direction of the modulus of periodicity
and the position of the branch points. From this standpoint it is easy
to see, geometrically, why the circular and hyperbolic functions can be
expressed by the exponentials, as opposed to the convoluted formalism
that Euler used.

But just as the orbits of the planets are not circular, neither is the
true motion of a top. An actual top, rotating with respect to a
gravitational potential, has both rotation and precession, each with a
distinct, but connected periodicity. As discussed above, this type of
doubly periodic motion is associated, in general, with elliptical
functions. This change from a simply periodic transcendental to a doubly
periodic one, like the change from line to surface and surface to
volume, is discontinuous. (See Figure 10.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure10-riemann67.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure10-riemann67.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

There is no middle ground between simple and elliptical transcendentals.

Now consider a top rotating at a constant speed. This motion maintains a
constant relationship between its angular rotation and its precession,
corresponding to a unique elliptical function. This elliptical function
can be expressed by mapping this motion onto a Riemann sphere using
Gauss's form of Moebius transformations. (See Figure 11.).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure11-riemann67.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure11-riemann67.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

If the relationship between the angular spin and precession were to
change, this new motion would define a different, but also, unique,
elliptical function. Thus, the uniqueness of an elliptical function can
be expressed by the ratio of the two periods.

Each unique elliptical function corresponds to a unique *modular*
function in which the modulus is expressed as a parallelogram whose
shape reflects the ratio of the periods. (See Figure 12.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure12-riemann67.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure12-riemann67.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

Riemann considered this parallelogram to be the map of a torus. (See
Figure 13.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure13-riemann67.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure13-riemann67.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

If the ratio of the periods is small the shape of the torus is fat. If
the ratio of the periods is large, then the corresponding torus will be
a different shape. (See Figure 14.).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure14-riemann67.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure14-riemann67.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

Just as the circular and hyperbolic functions can be expressed by the
exponential function, the ratio of the periods of an elliptical function
can be expressed by a hypergeometric function of the type that Gauss
discovered with respect to the arithmetic-geometric mean. (See [Riemann
for Anti-Dummies Part 66](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part66.html) .)
^[11](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part67.html#Footnote11)^

But for a spinning top whose motion is changing, such as due to friction
at the tip, the ratio between the periods is also always changing. Thus
the only appropriate way to characterize the general motion of a
spinning top is with respect to the entire manifold of all possible
elliptical functions. This entire manifold can be expressed by what
Gauss and Riemann identified as { *the elliptical modular function* }.

Gauss showed that though each unique elliptic function is associated
with a unique modular function, there is a unique set of Moebius
transformations that is common to all elliptical functions. This set
corresponds to the six different variations of the Moebius
transformation z+1 and -1/z. Repeated application of these
transformations produces a six-fold cycle. This is the same six-fold
cycle associated with the projective invariance of the cross-ratio. (See
[Riemann for Anti-Dummies Part
65](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part65.html) .)

Gauss developed the first image of the elliptical modular function in
his investigation of the arithmetic-geometric mean. (See Figure 15.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure15-riemann67.gif"
height="432" width="691"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure15-riemann67.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"432\" width=\"691\" />

That image was further elaborated by Riemann in his lectures on Gauss's
hypergeometric function. (See Figure 16.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure16-riemann67.jpg"
height="453" width="400"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure16-riemann67.jpg\"
alt=\"\" height=\"453\" width=\"400\" />

A computer generated image, rotated by 90 degrees can be seen in Figure
17.

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure17-riemann67.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure17-riemann67.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

In the latter picture, each colored region is bounded by three circular
arcs. The blue region marked "z" contains the fundamental period ratio
for all possible elliptical functions. For this reason, Gauss called
this region, "the fundamental region". This blue region is mapped onto
each of the other regions by the successive application of the Moebius
transformations z+1 and -1/z. Under each transformation, the fundamental
period of a specific elliptical function is mapped to all its congruent
ones.

Thus, Gauss's and Riemann's map express, as an image, the { *idea* } of
the manifold of all possible elliptical functions. The top's motion must
be considered as a pathway within this elliptical manifold. This image,
however, must be understood, as Cusa would indicate: it is only a {
*mean* } between the physical form and the true idea.

There is still more to the top's motion that we have, up until now,
ignored: the motion of the tip itself. If the tip is stationary, the
spinning top's motion can be characterized as a pathway in an { *anti*
}-Euclidean elliptical manifold. But if the top's tip is moving, that
adds an additional action to the overall motion of the top. Such
additional action is characterized, not by elliptical, but by
*hyper-elliptical* functions.

Such hyper-elliptical functions, Riemann showed, are expressed by a
different type of modulus and a different type of modular function. (See
Figure 18.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure18-riemann67.gif"
height="636" width="636"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/afigure18-riemann67.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"636\" width=\"636\" />

Whereas the elliptical modular functions are associated with a Moebius
transformation that maps a sphere (which is self-bounded and positively
curved) without stretching, the hyper-elliptical modular functions are
expressed by a unique type of Moebius transformation that maps a
self-bounded negatively curved surface without stretching.

At this point in our investigation the example of the simple spinning
top becomes an insufficient example of a physical expression of still
higher forms of hypergeometries. But if we follow the top's motion, as
Riemann indicated, into the astrophysical and microphysical domains,
such higher forms of hypergeometries emerge. For example, consider the
actual motion of the Earth, around its axis, around the Sun and
precession; or the motion within and among the galaxies; or the motions
in the sub-atomic domains indicated by the experimental evidence of
physical chemistry.

This succession from simple transcendental, to elliptical, to
hyper-elliptical illustrates another significant metaphysical principle.
Each species of transcendental function is bounded, not on its exterior,
but everywhere, by the characteristics of the principle that it
encompasses. The modular function for each species of transcendental
expresses this boundedness, as a unique type of quantization. Yet there
is another, higher form of quantization. This is associated with the
discontinuities between each species of transcendentals. The boundedness
of this "species of species" expresses nothing less than the
self-boundedness of the universe itself.

These types of considerations led Riemann to lay the foundations of an
even broader concept of multiply-extended manifolds, both in general
form, as in his 1854 habilitation dissertation, and in some specific
physical examples, such as his studies of heat or the motion of a fluid
ellipsoid, which will be explored in future installments of this series.

Such examples are the starting point from which to approach the pending
problems of physical science. But such efforts will not succeed, as
Riemann noted in his habilitation paper, unless "this task shall not be
hindered by too restricted conceptions, and that progress in perceiving
the connection of things shall not be obstructed by the prejudices of
tradition".

The most pernicious of such traditions is the belief in absolute space.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

NOTES

1\. []{#Footnote1} Plato, Parmenides 156d-e translated by Harold N.
Fowler, www.perseus.tufts.edu

2\. []{#Footnote2} Plato, Republic Book 4, 436d-437a, translated by Paul
Shorey, [www.perseus.tufts.edu](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/)

3\. []{#Footnote3} Nicholas of Cusa, De Possest 14, translated by Jasper
Hopkins, <http://cla.umn.edu/sites/hopkins>

4\. []{#Footnote4} Nicholas of Cusa, Op. Cit. 19-20

5\. []{#Footnote5} Plato, Timaeus 37d; 38b; translated W.R.M. Lamb
[www.perseus.tufts.edu](http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/)

6\. []{#Footnote6} The actual shape of the Earth is quite complex, and
so its motion is more complex than a spinning top. In conjunction with
Dirichlet, Riemann studied this phenomenon, producing a treatise about
it on the subject of the motion of a fluid ellipsoid. This work contains
some important results of more general significance which will be
treated in a future pedagogical.

7\. []{#Footnote7} De Possest 42, Op. Cit.

8\. []{#Footnote8} Felix Klein, The Mathematical Theory of the Top,
Charles Scribner's Sons, New York, 1897.

9\. []{#Footnote9} De Possest 9, Op. Cit.

10\. []{#Footnote10} De Possest 63, Op. Cit.

11\. []{#Footnote11} These functions were called "theta" functions by
Jacobi and Riemann. As distinct from the exponential functions whose
proportionality of growth is constant, the "theta" functions are
characterized by a proportionality of growth that is changing
exponentially. An example of a type of "theta" function are the
functions P and Q which Gauss used to express the arithmetic-geometric
mean. These functions are defined by a series whose exponents are
squares. Consequently, the proportionality of growth of these series is
always increasing, specifically, by the odd powers.
:::

::: {.addtoany_share_save_container .addtoany_content_bottom}
::: {.a2a_kit .a2a_kit_size_32 .addtoany_list a2a-url="http://lymcanada.org/67/" a2a-title="Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 67 :  A View From The Top"}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F67%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2067%20%3A%20%20A%20View%20From%20The%20Top "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F67%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2067%20%3A%20%20A%20View%20From%20The%20Top "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/google_plus?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F67%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2067%20%3A%20%20A%20View%20From%20The%20Top "Google+"){.a2a_button_google_plus}
[](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd .addtoany_share_save}
:::
:::
:::

[ [ Posted on ]{.screen-reader-text} [February 20, 2010 February 24,
2019](http://lymcanada.org/67/) ]{.posted-on} [ [ [ Author
]{.screen-reader-text} [Bruce
Director](http://lymcanada.org/author/bdirector/){.url .fn .n} ]{.author
.vcard} ]{.byline} [ [ Categories ]{.screen-reader-text}
[EN](http://lymcanada.org/category/en/) , [Riemmann for
Anti-Dummies](http://lymcanada.org/category/science-1/c132-riemmann-for-anti-dummies/)
]{.cat-links}
