::: post-thumbnail
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.attachment-post-thumbnail
.size-post-thumbnail .wp-post-image width="472" height="480"
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part68_files_figure001-riemann68.gif"}

\<img width=\"472\" height=\"480\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part68_files_figure001-riemann68.gif\"
class=\"attachment-post-thumbnail size-post-thumbnail wp-post-image\"
alt=\"\" />
:::

::: entry-header
# Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 68 : An Insider {#riemann-for-anti-dummies-part-68-an-insider .entry-title}
:::

::: entry-content
::: pf-content
August 28, 2006

::: {align="justify"}
:::

## An Insider's Guide to the Universe

::: {align="justify"}
:::

by Bruce Director

Though all humans are blessed to spend eternity inside the universe,
many squander the mortal portion, deluded they are somewhere else. These
assumed "outsiders" acquire an obsessive belief in a fantasy world whose
nature is determined by { *a priori* } axiomatic assumptions of the
deluded's choosing, and an insistence that any experimental evidence
contradicting these axioms must be either disregarded, or, if grudgingly
acknowledged, determined to be from "outside" their world. Typical of
such beliefs are the notions of Euclidean geometry, empiricism,
positivism, existentialism, or that most pernicious of pathologies
afflicting our culture today: Baby-Boomerism.

[ ]{#more-1191}

Since it is inevitable that those afflicted with this mental disease
will experience occasions (at least one is guaranteed, though many are
likely), in which they will confront the fallacy of their beliefs,
dissecting their delusions primarily provides clinical evidence relevant
to psycho-pathologists. While the study of such pathologies is essential
to the identification of disease, the treatment and prevention demands a
positive conception of health. Thus the continued development of the
human condition requires the happy investigation of the real world that
humans have been designed to inhabit. As the history of mankind's
increasing dominance in and over the universe demonstrates, it is the
natural proclivity of man to do that. Fortunately, as Plato, Cusa,
Leibniz and Kepler all emphasized, the universe has been created to this
end, for cognition is a pervasive and efficient principle { *in* } the
universe. Further, the entire universe is at work in every infinitesimal
part, accessible to being grasped, and acted upon, by the human mind.

The most advanced approach to such an investigation of the universe
"from the inside", was laid down by Riemann in his famous 1854
habilitation dissertation. As revolutionary as it was ancient, Riemann
insisted on a return to { *ante* }-Euclidean sanity, demanding that
science abandon the acceptance of axiomatic systems, and proceed solely
on the basis of hypotheses generated from the investigation of physical
principles. The problem Riemann faced was that, for more than two
thousand years, scientists had become indoctrinated into accepting
psuedo-systems (such as Euclidean geometry), as the prerequisite
scaffold on which science must be built, either as the accepted, but
assumed false, form of expressing a true discovery, or, as in the case
of Aristotelianism, the actual form of human knowledge. Riemann
recognized, as did his sponsor in this project, C. F. Gauss, and Gauss's
sponsor, A. G. Kaestner, that, whether as a means of expression, or as
an actually held false belief, Aristotelean and Euclidean-type dogmas
were obstructions that imprisoned the mind inside a false world,
rendering it only capable of peering, impotently, into what the victim
believed to be an outer, real world.

Consequently, for science to make progress, this distinction must be
broken. There { *is* } no outside. *There is one, self-bounded universe,
whose progressive development is characterized by an anti-entropic
tendency towards higher states of organization and existence, which is
knowable from the inside through the cognitive powers embodied in the
human mind* . *The appropriate form of expression of this physical
reality, is, for modern science, based on the conception of a Riemannian
tensor ^[1](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote1)^ .*

On the occasion of his habilitation dissertation, Riemann elaborated the
method by which this insider's science must proceed. In so doing, he
gave voice to the actual form of discovery that underlay every advance
in science, from the ancient discoveries associated with the
Egyptian-Pythagorean science of { *Sphaerics* }, through Gauss's
then-recent accomplishments in astronomy, geodesy, geomagnetism,
electrodynamics and epistemology. But he went further, generalizing this
method to a degree never before achieved, whose full implications are
only now coming to light with LaRouche's discoveries in the domain of
the science of physical economy, and the elaboration of those ideas
through the ongoing research project of economic animations currently
being developed, under LaRouche's personal direction, by a team of young
thinkers from the LaRouche Youth Movement.

Nevertheless, reaction dies hard. As soon as Riemann's audible words
faded away, his method came under attack. At first this attack took the
form of stone cold silence. After Riemann's premature death, the assault
took on a more sophistical form. While his students and collaborators
continued to animate his ideas, his enemies attempted to suffocate his
program under a system of mathematical formalism, typified by the
presentation in Luther Pfahler Eisenhart's 1926 treatise, *Riemannian
Geometry* ^[2](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote2)^ . The
problem with such treatments as Eisenhart's is not the use of
mathematical formulas as such (for Riemann utilized certain formal
expressions himself), but the substitution of formal expressions, for
Riemann's actual ideas. In so doing, Riemann's enemies succeeded, at
least in part, in imposing a new form of Euclidean dogma, under the
guise of a neo-Euclidean formalism maliciously misnamed "Riemannian
Geometry". Since the effect of this sophistry has now brought science,
and in a broader sense, society as a whole, to a breakdown point, it is
necessary to revive Riemann's actual approach. The first step is to
place Riemann's discovery inside the historical process in which it is
still unfolding.

::: {align="justify"}
:::

From Brunelleschi To Kepler

::: {align="justify"}
:::

Much to the dismay of the Babylonian priesthood from which the dogmas of
Euclid and Aristotle sprang, the human mind can *recognize and act* on
universal physical principles *without* resort to mathematical
formalism. Euclid's *Elements* themselves, reluctantly, but
definitively, testify to this fact. None of the discoveries reported in
Euclid's *Elements* were, or could have been, discovered by the
deductive method utilized by Euclid. As anyone who has tried to actually
recreate those discoveries for himself soon realizes, the discoveries
reported therein can only be recreated in reverse order, beginning with
the physical construction of the five regular solids as a consequence of
spherical action, then to the development of incommensurable magnitudes,
proportions and numbers, and finally to the construction of the plane
figures. Even more to the point, the devastating flaw in Euclid's
*Elements* is embedded in the characteristic which the Aristoteleans
considered its most viable attribute: the deductive method.

That flaw, as Kaestner, Gauss and Riemann emphasized, is exposed by the
*Elements'* dependence on the validity of the parallel postulate--a
proposition which cannot be proven within the deductive system on which
the *Elements* relies. As Gauss stated, without the parallel postulate,
there are no similar triangles, and without similar triangles, all the
theorems of Euclidean geometry fail. But, as Gauss also emphasized, the
parallel postulate assumes something that is nowhere stated--that the
physical universe is infinitely extended, rectilinearly, or as Gauss and
Riemann would put it: flat.
^[3](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote3)^

Though the achievements of Greek science in the generations following
Euclid (most notably the accomplishments of Archimedes, Eratosthenes,
and Aristarchus) are derived from the *ante* -Euclidean approach
associated with the astrophysics that the Egyptians and Pythagoreans
denoted as *Sphaerics* , the relative dominance of this saner form of
science began to fade with the murder of Archimedes by Roman soldiers in
approximately 212 B.C. The ensuing relative dominance of Euclidean
geometry (with the associated cultural decay of the Roman Empire praised
so highly by Lord Shelburne's Edward Gibbon), was brought to a close in
1436, with Brunelleschi's successful completion of the free-standing,
self-supporting cupola over the church of Santa Maria del Fiore in
Florence. From that time to ours, Burnelleschi's Dome stands as a
defiant reminder that the real universe is not flat, as the Euclideans
would indicate, but is determined by physical principles, which Gauss
and Riemann would later express as physical curvature (as will be
developed more fully below).

As LaRouche emphasized in 1988, to the shock of many at the time, the
principle that Brunelleschi recognized and employed in the successful
construction of the Dome, was the principle of least-action expressed by
the catenary-- a principle which was not fully elaborated until Leibniz
did so more than two hundred years later. Nevertheless, what
Brunelleschi's accomplishment demonstrates, is that the human mind is
capable of recognizing, acting on, and communicating knowledge of
physical principles without ever reducing those principles to a formal
mathematical construct. Subsequently, when Leibniz showed that the
physical principle underlying the catenary could be characterized as a
function of logarithmic functions, he gave that expression a
mathematical form. Nevertheless, the mathematical expression of
Leibniz's discovery is not the principle. It is a *rigorously ironical*
statement of the transcendental nature of the catenary principle--a
precise statement of a mathematical ambiguity from which the principle
that Leibniz discovered can be recreated anew in the mind of the
scientist. ^[4](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote4)^

The universal principle which Brunelleshi's achievement exemplifies, was
elaborated in the shadow of his newly created Dome by Nicholas of Cusa.
Writing in *De Docta Ignorantia,* among other locations, Cusa insisted,
*on epistemological grounds* , that the characteristic of action in the
physical universe is not constant, but is always changing non-uniformly.
This meant that, contrary to the Aristoteleans, physical action did not
conform to what was mathematically convenient-- perfect circles. Rather,
Cusa showed that the non-uniformity of physical action is a
characteristic of the universe's *self-perfectability* , which is a more
perfect condition than the static, unchanging sterility of a world
governed by Aristotle's perfect circles. Further, because human
creativity is central to the self-perfectability of the universe, the
mind is capable of discovering, *from within the unfolding universe* ,
the underlying principles governing it.

Cusa's work reintroduced into science the requirement to identify and
measure a physical principle by the characteristic of change expressed
by the action of that principle in the physical world--a characteristic
that Gauss and Riemann would later refer to as *curvature* . The first,
and perhaps most dramatic, application of this was Kepler's discovery of
the principle of universal gravitation.

A full pedagogical reworking of Kepler's discovery, as detailed in his
1609 *New Astronomy* , is currently being developed by a team of
researchers from the LYM, but a brief summary of the relevant points is
necessary for this discussion.

Kepler rejected the Aristotelean precept that knowledge of the physical
world must be confined to the domain of sense perception, and that
principles governing physical motion were relegated to, what was for
them, an ultimately unknowable, and unchanging, metaphysical domain. For
Aristotelean astronomers, this posed a particularly vexing problem,
because the full planetary motions extend outside the field of vision of
the observer, and the causes of that motion are completely outside the
astronomer's sensual and (for the Aristotelean), intellectual ken.
Consequently, the astronomers of the Roman period disclaimed any
truthful knowledge of planetary motion, settling for mathematical
descriptions of their speculations about how those motions might appear,
were they able to directly perceive them.

This view conformed perfectly to the prevailing feudalist opinion that
mortal man was, at best, a sophisticated beast whose cognitive powers
were outside of, and inconsequential to, the "actual" universe, which
the Aristoteleans falsely imagined to be governed by a fixed set of
eternally unchanging laws. As such, mortal man, Aristotelean opinion
held, must be governed by the, apparently chaotic, laws of animal
behavior, without recourse to universal, eternal principles, which they
insisted did not change.
^[5](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote5)^ But as a
self-avowed adherent of Cusa, Kepler realized that this view of man and
the universe was wrong. Man, through his powers of cognition, is capable
of knowing the principles governing the universe as *principles of
change,* as Heraclitus and Cusa both emphasized. Consequently, Kepler
understood the motions of the planets and man's investigation of them,
as part of a *single, unfolding, self-developing creation,* which
included the development of life and human cognition. Mortal man is not
outside the universe nor is the universe outside the province of mortal
man. Rather, mortal man, possessed with the power of cognition,
transcends mortality, playing a unique and integral role in the
eternally continuing development of the universe as a whole.

Consequently, Kepler emphasized, the best vantage point from which to
discover the principles of planetary motion is not outside, but inside
the universe:

For as the Sun in its revolution about its own axis moves all the
planets by the emanation which it sends out from itself, so also the
mind, as the philosophers tell us, understanding itself and all that is
in itself, stimulates the use of reason, and by spreading and unfolding
its simplicity causes all things to be understood. And so closely are
the motions of the planets round the Sun and the processes of reasoning
linked and tied to each other that if the Earth, our home, did not
measure out its annual circuit in the midst of the other spheres,
changing place for place, position for position, human reasoning would
never struggle to the absolutely true distances of the planets, and to
the other things which depend on them, and would never establish
astronomy. ^[6](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote6)^

::: {align="justify"}
:::

As such, he rejected the mathematical models of planetary motion that
had been postulated by Ptolemy, Copernicus and Tycho Brahe. Though each
model was radically different, all three tried to describe the
experimentally determined non-uniform motion of the planets, by fitting
the observational statistics into mathematically defined perfect
circles. Kepler painstakingly demonstrated in the opening section of the
*New Astronomy* , that such statistical methods were incapable of
determining the truth, as all three models gave virtually the same
statistical result. To this, the protagonists of Ptolemy, Copernicus or
Brahe could raise no objection, as all three accepted the Aristotelean
belief that mathematical formalism was the only certain form of
knowledge.

But for Kepler, hypotheses concerning the true physical causes are the
only form of knowledge. Consequently, he proceeded to show that there is
an anomaly inherent in the statistical interpretations of Ptolemy,
Copernicus and Brahe which reflects the existence of a physical
principle not accounted for in any of the three systems. Like the
parallel postulate for Euclid's *Elements* , Kepler's anomaly cannot be
detected by the methods of Ptolemy, Copernicus and Brahe, and no
manipulation within the respective mathematical systems, could eliminate
it. Once identified, however, either the system must be rejected, or its
insanity must be adopted.

The underlying assumption of all three models, was the Aristotelean
insistence that motion of a material body cannot be caused by an
immaterial principle but must be caused by something within the body
itself. Consequently, the Aristoteleans saw the planetary orbit as the
artifact of the planet. Since the planet's apparently non-uniform motion
along the arc of its orbit deviated from the presumed perfection of
uniform circular motion, Ptolemy, Copernicus, and Brahe all sought some
point (equant) around which the planet would be traversing equal arcs
along its orbit. Kepler showed, exhaustively, that no such point
existed. No matter how cleverly one tried to manipulate the statistics,
with respect to the models of Ptolemy, Copernicus or Brahe, a
discrepancy remained.

Kepler concluded that this discrepancy was not a statistical aberration.
It was a matter of principle. For Kepler the planet's orbit is not the
trace of its motion. Rather, the orbit is determined by the *physical
cause* that is determining the planet's motion. That cause, Kepler
insisted, is a physical principle (gravitation) that pervades the
universe. Under this principle, there is a connection between the Sun
and the planets individually (characterized by equal areas: equal
times), and the Sun and all the planets collectively (characterized by
the harmonic relationships among the planets' minimum and maximum
speeds). The observational statistics were, for Kepler, simply the
footprints of the principle. Once the principle was identified, the
footprints could be explained.

Thus, for Kepler, the planet's non-uniform motion is guided at every
infinitesimal interval by the harmonic characteristics of the solar
system as a whole. Those harmonic principles defined the planet's orbit
as what Leibniz would later call a least-action pathway of the solar
system. In other words, the planets are not moving in one of infinitely
many possible orbits in an otherwise empty space. Rather, the planets
are moving in least-action pathways uniquely defined by the harmonic
characteristics of the solar system. From the standpoint of the planet,
Kepler emphasized, that pathway is a straight line. "Straightness" , as
Gauss would later insist, is established by physical, not { *a priori* }
mathematical considerations. The human mind judges those physical
considerations as the characteristic of change of a physical principle.
That changing characteristic, Gauss and Riemann would later express as
the notion of *physical curvature* .

::: {align="justify"}
:::

Physical Curvature From Leibniz to Gauss

Kepler's revolutionized physical astronomy demanded a complete change in
the prevailing mathematics, which is a far cry from the state of science
today. While Kepler pushed the physics forward and demanded the creation
of a new mathematics consistent with it, today's sophistical peer review
system insists on the opposite: no physical discoveries are allowed into
the temple, unless stated in terms of the already existing mathematics.

By demonstrating that physical action is truly non-uniform, Kepler had
to confront the problem of how to measure the motion of the planet as a
function of the changing effect of the principle of gravitation. That
required the development of a new mathematics that could express
position as a function of change, instead of denoting change as merely a
difference in position. Kepler pointed to the direction the new
mathematics must take, and demanded that future scientists develop it.

He specified that the entire solar system must be considered as the unit
of action, and the motion of the planet at any moment must, accordingly,
be measured as a function of the harmonic characteristics of the solar
system as a whole. Those harmonic characteristics, as reflected in the
role of the five Platonic solids and the proportions corresponding to
musical intervals among the planet's minimum and maximum speeds,
determined the number and positions of the planetary orbits. Within each
orbit, the planet's motion was measured with respect to the orbit as a
whole. Thus a mutually inverse relationship exists between the momentary
effect of gravity on the planet, and the total effect of what Gauss
would later call the gravitational potential, of the solar system as a
whole.

Leibniz generalized this conception of Kepler by the introduction of the
notion of the infinitesimal as the expression of the pervasive, *yet
ever-changing* , effect of a universal principle at every point of
physical space-time. He expressed the inverse relationship between the
infinitesimal and universal expressions of that principle as,
respectively, the differential and integral forms of the calculus. This
single *infinitesimal calculus* of Leibniz is the only true calculus.
The frauds of Newton and Cauchy are nothing more than crude sophistries
aimed at eliminating the metaphysical significance of Leibniz's physical
concept of the infinitesimal. While the infinitesimal-free formalisms of
Newton, Cauchy and their progeny might be appealing to pure
mathematicians, anyone seeking to understand anything about the physical
universe is drawn back, consciously or not, to some form of Leibniz's
conception. The relative potency, or lack thereof, of a scientist, is,
in part, reflected in the degree to which that scientist is conscious,
explicitly or implicitly, of the preeminence of Leibniz's method.

Leibniz's approach to the calculus is recounted primarily through his
own writings and those of his collaborator, Johann Bernoulli. It has
been treated, pedagogically, in previous installments of this series.
For reasons relevant to this pedagogical discussion, Leibniz's and
Bernoulli's calculus will be examined, through the example of its
application to the catenary, from the standpoint of its later
development by Gauss and Riemann.

The catenary is the crucial example of the metaphysical truthfulness of
Leibniz's calculus. All prior attempts, most notably Galileo's, to
explain the catenary's shape from mathematical considerations, failed.
It was only through the application of Leibniz's calculus to the
physical characteristics of the hanging chain, that Bernoulli and
Leibniz succeeded in revealing the metaphysical principle underlying the
catenary. ^[7](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote7)^

Both Leibniz and Bernoulli recognized that the shape assumed by a
hanging chain of uniform thickness reflects the physical effect of
applying a tension across a gravitational potential. Therefore, they
rejected any attempt to explain the catenary by assuming it was a
"curve" in an otherwise empty and flat Euclidean space. Rather, they
considered the shape of the curve as expressing the non-uniform changing
interaction of gravity and tension. This can be confirmed by the
experiments Bernoulli specifies in his text on the integral calculus,
or, those used in pedagogical presentations by members of the LYM
^[8](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote8)^ . Anyone
performing these experiments will recognize a change in the direction of
the chain from point to point, as the physically determined effect of
the changing relationship of gravity and tension. Thus the curvature of
the chain is not an arbitrary deviation from Euclidean straightness. It
is the expression of an experimentally determined physical
characteristic.

It is important to emphasize, however, that curvature, in this sense, is
not a mathematical object, but a mathematical expression of a physically
determined characteristic from which the metric relations of the
catenary are derived. These are expressed by the functional relationship
between the length of the chain within a given interval, and the
changing curvature within that same interval. In the case of the
catenary, this relationship is expressed mathematically by Bernoulli's
differential equation which expresses the length of the chain as a
function of the changing effect of gravity on tension.
^[9](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote9)^

Like a planetary orbit, the catenary exhibits a total curvature which is
expressed by the overall shape of the hanging chain
^[10](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote10)^ . Also like a
planetary orbit, the curvature is changing, differently, in every
infinitesimal part. This infinitesimal curvature is an expression of the
action of a physical principle acting tangentially on the physical chain
as if it were acting on the visible world from outside. Though outside
the visible world, it is not outside the universe. Consequently
discovering this infinitesimal expression is the means by which man can
discover from the inside of a physical process, the principles governing
it from outside the visible domain. The infinitesimal curvature can be
measured, as Leibniz proposed, by the inverse of the radius of the
osculating circle at that point. (See Figure 1.).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure001-riemann68.gif"
height="480" width="472"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure001-riemann68.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"472\" />

However, that curvature can also be measured from inside the chain, so
to speak, by the experimentally measured changing effect of the
interaction of gravity and tension on the chain, as specified by
Leibniz's and Bernoulli's differential functions.

However, deeper investigations of the physical universe requires the
ability to discover, from the inside, the effects of many principles
acting together at a single place in physical space-time. This notion of
"intrinsic" curvature becomes more clear, when understood from the
standpoint of Gauss's development of it in his famous treatise on curved
surfaces ^[11](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote11)^ .
Gauss had been deeply involved in physical investigations in geodesy,
geomagnetism and astronomy, such as his determination of the orbit of
Ceres, his determination of the shape of the Earth, and his
determination of the nature of the Earth's magnetic field. Like Kepler's
determination of the principles of planetary motion, all such
investigations demanded the determination of physical principles from
the inside. For Kepler, that meant determining the motions of the
planets from a planet (Earth) that was also moving according to the very
principles Kepler was trying to discover. But Gauss had an additional
problem. Whereas Kepler had the benefit of a large number of widely
spaced observations from which to work, Gauss was working from a small
number of relatively infinitesimal measurements. This prompted Gauss to
develop an extended form of Leibniz's calculus, in which he investigated
the relationship between global physical characteristics and their
expression in the infinitesimally small. This approach has since become
known as differential geometry.

Such physically determined surfaces, Gauss insisted, must not be
considered as curved objects otherwise embedded in a flat
three-dimensional Euclidean space, but as what Riemann would later call
doubly-extended manifolds. This concept, though new to Gauss in this
form, harkens back to a concept Kepler pronounced in the second chapter
of the *Mysterium Cosmographicum* . Referencing Cusa's emphasis on the
epistemological importance of the difference between the curved and the
straight, Kepler distinguishes between the globe, which is a sphere
embedded in three-dimensional space, and a sphere, which he considers to
be simply the surface. The former, Kepler emphasized, is a mixture of
the curved and the straight, whereas the latter is pure curvature.

Consistent with this view of Kepler, Gauss also banished the assumption
of the flatness of Euclidean geometry in his investigation of curved
surfaces, and considered the surfaces as determined purely by their
curvature. Adopting a method from astronomy and geodesy, Gauss measured
the curvature of the surface by mapping the changing directions of the
normal to the surface onto a sphere.
^[12](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote12)^ (See Figure
2.).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure002-riemann68.gif"
height="240" width="360"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure002-riemann68.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"240\" width=\"360\" />

The areas of the resulting spherical maps (called Gauss maps) are
greater when the corresponding areas of the surface are more curved and
less when the corresponding areas of the surface are less curved. Gauss
called the total area of the spherical map the total, or integral,
curvature of that region of the surface. Within that region, however,
the curvature could vary quite widely from place to place. Thus, it was
necessary for Gauss to develop a concept of local, or infinitesimal
measure of curvature at every point within that region. This he defined
as the proportion between the area of every infinitesimally small area
of the surface and the corresponding infinitesimally small area of the
Gauss map. He showed that this quantity could also be measured by the
inverse of the product of the radii of the osculating circles to the
curves of minimum and maximum curvature at that point. (See Figure 3.).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure003-riemann68.gif"
height="480" width="758"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure003-riemann68.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"758\" />

From these two measurements, integral and local curvature, Gauss could
quantify the characteristics of the surface in the large and the
changing characteristics in the small.

To measure the curvature of a surface in this way, requires viewing the
surfaces from the outside, as if they were embedded in a higher
dimensional space
^[13](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote13)^ . However,
Gauss, like Cusa, Kepler and Leibniz, realized that in real science, one
must be able to measure the physical curvature from the inside, as Gauss
had done for the determination of the orbit of Ceres, the shape of the
Earth, or the characteristics of the Earth's magnetic field. This meant
being able to determine how the surface is changing in the
infinitesimally small, from within the surface. To do this, Gauss relied
on an application of Leibniz's principle of least-action, which, in the
case of surfaces, is expressed by the behavior of that surfaces's
shortest lines, i.e. geodesics
^[14](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote14)^ . The
characteristics of these geodesics, like the catenary or a planetary
orbit, are defined by the nature of the physical principles from which
the surface is generated. Thus, their behavior expresses those physical
principles.

To do this, Gauss first showed that if, from any point on a surface, a
set of geodesic curves of equal lengths is extended, then the curve that
connects the endpoints of those geodesics will be perpendicular to all
the geodesics. (See Figure 4.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure004-riemann68.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure004-riemann68.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

More generally, he showed, that if any arbitrary curve is drawn on a
surface, and geodesic curves of equal length are drawn perpendicular to
that arbitrary curve, the curve connecting the endpoints of those
geodesics will also be perpendicular to them. (See Figure 5.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure005-riemann68.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure005-riemann68.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

Consequently, on any surface there is an intrinsic set of orthogonal
curves, at least one of which are geodesics. (See Figure 6.).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure006-riemann68.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure006-riemann68.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

In this way Gauss dispensed with all *a priori* coordinate systems such
as that of Descartes, and replaced them with a set of parameters that
expressed the physical nature of the surface itself.

From this Gauss was able to develop a means to express the length of a
geodesic curve as a function of the curvature of the surface, and vice
versa. That length could be expressed as a function of the orthogonal
curves that parametize the surface by a generalized form of the
Pythagorean theorem. (See Figure 7.).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure007-riemann68.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure007-riemann68.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

Unlike on a "flat" Euclidean surface, in which the relationship between
length of the hypotenuse and the legs of the right triangle is
independent of its position on the surface, on a curved surface that
relationship changes depending on its position. That change is a
function of the changing curvature of the surface. Consequently, Gauss's
generalized Pythagorean function, called Gauss's metric function,
expresses how this relationship *changes* from place to place on the
surface, depending on the *changing* curvature. (See Figure 8.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure008-riemann68.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure008-riemann68.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

This established a determinable functional relationship between length
(metric) and curvature.

From a physical standpoint, this meant that he could measure the
changing curvature of the surface from the physically measured changes
in the lengths of geodesics with respect to the physical parameters of
the surface. Gauss applied this method in his famous measurement of the
longitude line from Goettingen to Altona, from which, on the basis of a
16″ of an arc discrepancy, he developed a new conception of the entire
shape of the Earth!

However, the expression of this relationship between length and
curvature was mathematically quite complicated. Consequently, Gauss also
found a much simpler expression of the relationship between the behavior
of the geodesic and the curvature. He recognized that in the real,
*anti* -Euclidean world, there is no such thing as similar triangles. On
any curved surface, the sum of the angles of a triangle formed by
shortest lines is always greater or less than 180 degrees, depending on
whether the surface on which that triangle exists is positively or
negatively curved.
^[15](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote15)^ This
difference, which Gauss called the angular excess, or defect, is a
function of the area of the triangle. On a positively curved surface,
the greater the area of the triangle, the greater the angular excess, up
to a maximum. On a negatively curved surface, the smaller the area of
the triangle, the greater the angular defect, down to a minimum of zero.
The specific proportion between the angular excess and defect and the
area is a function of the curvature. On a more (e.g, positively) curved
portion of a surface, a triangle encompassing a small area will have a
larger angular excess, than a triangle encompassing a similar sized area
on a less curved portion. Thus, the curvature of a portion of the
surface is expressed by the changing relationship between the area of a
geodesic triangle and the angular excess or defect.

In this way, Gauss showed that the curvature of a surface could be
measured by the proportion of the spherical excess (or defect) to the
area of the geodesic triangle. This enabled the scientist to determine
the characteristic curvature of the surface from on the surface without
regard to the arbitrary fiction of Euclidean space, or some arbitrary
fixed Cartesian, or other, coordinate system.

Though the formulas expressing these relationships could become very
complicated, Gauss also developed the means to carry out their
calculation, making his concepts directly applicable to the physical
problems he was investigating.

In this way, Gauss took the first steps to liberate mankind from the
lingering oppression of Euclidean geometry. His protege, Bernhard
Riemann, would push it further.

::: {align="justify"}
:::

A Brief Interlude on Time

::: {align="justify"}
:::

Before turning directly to Riemann's contribution, it is necessary to
include a brief note on the principle of least-action, both for the sake
of the scientific completeness of the argument presented, and to wrench
the reader away from any lingering dependence on *a priori* notions of
space and time. Perhaps even more stubborn than the adherence to the
spatial relations of Euclidean geometry, is the psychological adherence
to a belief in the existence of some absolute measure of time. As Plato
emphasized in the Timaeus, later echoed, most notably by Philo,
Augustine and Cusa, time is not an absolute quantity measured by some
great grandfather clock in the sky. Time is a relation of change. As
Plato stated it, " *time is the moving image of eternity* " *.*

This is the way Kepler understood time. Instead of measuring the
non-uniform motion of the planet by a measure of uniform absolute time
(mean Sun) Kepler measured time by the planet's motion itself (true
Sun.) He took as the unit of time the unique interval in which the
planet's motion is the same at beginning and end: the entire orbit.
Equal portions of time were measured by those units with equal amounts
of motion, i.e. equal orbital areas. These orbital areas are relative to
the orbit, not absolute. Thus the planet's motion defines what is time.
Without the motion, there is no time.

A similar issue is raised by Fermat's subsequent discovery that light
travels the path of least-time.
^[16](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote16)^ Under simple
reflection, the path of light is the shortest distance. Yet under
refraction, Fermat showed, the path of light is the path of least time.
The difference between the two physical actions is, that under
reflection there is no change in medium, whereas under refraction, there
is. The change in medium produces a change in the physical
characteristics of the manifold of action. That physical change defines
a new behavior for the shortest path, i.e. the geodesic. Under
reflection, that geodesic is the path of least-distance. Under
refraction it is least-time. The nature of light doesn't change. It
always seeks the shortest path. But when the characteristics of the
manifold in which that light is acting changes the shortest path changes
from least-distance to least-time.

Thus again, time is not an absolute quantity, but a characteristic of
change of physical action--a change in the characteristics of physical
space-time.

In the real world there is no absolute time. There is, as Heraclitus,
Plato and Cusa emphasized, *change* , of which time is a relative
measure. The most efficient means to wrest oneself from the crippling
belief of absolute time is to recognize the obvious: *the only unit of
absolute time is eternity.* *All smaller actions are just parts of
eternity whose measure is relative to the manifold in which it occurs* .

::: {align="justify"}
:::

Riemannian Manifolds and Tensors

::: {align="justify"}
:::

Riemann began his June 10, 1854 habilitation dissertation in the
tradition of Hans Christaan Anderson's little boy in the story about the
Emperor with no clothes. He declared that though the assumptions of
Euclidean geometry have been accepted for more than two thousand years,
no one had bothered to consider whether they are true. Since all
physical action is experimentally determined to be *anti* -Euclidean,
Riemann insisted that the *a priori assumptions* of Euclidean geometry
must be abolished and banned from future consideration in science.

Riemann replaced the arbitrary assumption of an absolute Euclidean
space, with the idea of a physical manifold of action whose
"dimensions", like the parameters of Gauss's surfaces, denote the
physical principles acting in that manifold. The number of these
dimensions is not fixed *a priori,* as are the three linear dimensions
of Euclidean geometry, but are determined by the number of physical
principles that must be considered to fully express the physical action
of the manifold.

Thus, Riemann extended Gauss's notion of a surface to an *n-tply
extended manifold* , of which Gauss's surfaces represent a special case
of a doubly-extended manifold. For example, the path of light under
reflection can be seen as a geodesic in a simply-extended manifold
because the position of the light can be determined completely from one
physical parameter: the angle of incidence. On the other hand, the path
of light under refraction is a geodesic in a doubly-extended manifold
because the presence of the additional principle requires the
determination of position with respect to two parameters: the angle of
incidence and the index of refraction. Again, it is not the light which
changes from reflection to refraction, but the manifold in which it is
acting. That change in the physical principles acting on the manifold
produces a corresponding change in the characteristic of the geodesic,
from the shortest path to the path of quickest time.

In a fragmentary note written between 1852 and 1853, prior to the
delivery of his habilitation dissertation, Riemann gave an example of
his concept of a manifold determined by *physical* principles, not *a
priori* geometrical dimensions.

The concept of a manifold of multiple dimensions subsists independently
of our intuitions of space. Space, plane and line are only the most
intuitive examples of a manifold of three, two or one dimensions. Yet
without having the most minimal intuition we would be able to develop an
entire Geometry. I want to explain this with an example:

Suppose that I wanted to make an experiment or observation and it were
only important to me to establish one numerical value, say, the degree
of heat. In this case, all possible results could be represented by a
continuous series of numerical values from positive infinity to negative
infinity. But suppose that I wanted to determine two numerical values,
say, I wanted to make a determination of temperature and a determination
of weight, then the results would have to be conditioned by two
magnitudes x and y. Here I would only obtain the totality of cases if I
were to give x and y all values between negative infinity and positive
infinity, combining each value of x with each value of y. I will obtain
a unique case so long as x taken also with y has a determined value.

Now I can extract out the totality of cases, a complex of cases, I can,
for example establish the equation ax + by + c = 0 and now put all those
cases together where x and y satisfy this equation: I were able to call
this complex of cases a {straight line}. From this definition of a
straight line I would be able to derive all those theorems about
straight lines that occur in geometry. It is clear that one could
proceed in this way without relying on the most minimal intuitions about
space.

By this manner of treatment of geometry, or the theory of manifolds of
three dimensions, all the axioms which are taken in the usual manner of
treating spacial intuitions, as for example, that through any two points
only one straight line is possible, the first axiom of Euclid,
disappear, and only those which are valid for magnitudes in general, for
example, that the order of summands is arbitrary, remain.

One now finds easily, how, in the same way, one can obtain a manifold of
two dimensions, independent of the existence of a plane, also how one
can reach a magnitude of arbitrarily many dimensions. We only must make
observations which (... concern the determination of many numerical
magnitudes. sentence completed by Weber.)

But it is also interesting to understand the possibility that this
treatment of geometry, would, nevertheless, be extremely unfruitful,
since we would not find any new theorems and that what is achieved
easily and simply through the representation of space is only turned
into something complex and difficult. One has to, in general, opt to
take the opposite way and where, one runs into the geometry of manifolds
of more dimensions, as in the study of definite integrals in the theory
of imaginary magnitudes, one uses the intuitions of space as an aid. It
is good to know, how, through this, one achieves a true overview about
the subject, and only through this way can the essential points be
directly brought forward.

::: {align="justify"}
:::

Thus, with Euclidean *a priori* dimensions replaced by physical
principles whose number and characteristics reflect the physical
characteristics of a manifold of physical action, it fell to Riemann to
outline how to express the functional relationship among these
principles, without resort to any *a priori* assumptions. The
preliminary direction for this was given in his habilitation
dissertation through the development of his concept of a "
*multiply-extended magnitude* ".

Action in an *n-tply* extended physical manifold, Riemann insisted, must
be expressed by the appropriate *n-tply extended magnitude* . Such
magnitudes *do not* express a fixed set of relationships as in Euclidean
geometry. Rather, Riemann's *n-tply* extended magnitudes express the
*dynamic* relationships among the principles that determine the physical
action in the manifold.

An elementary example is the ancient Pythagorean investigation of the
line, square and cube. Think of a line, square and cube whose segment,
side and edge, respectively, are all the same length. Are these lengths
all the same magnitude? From the standpoint of Euclidean geometry, or
formal algebra, the answer would be yes. But from the standpoint of the
physical geometry of the Pythagoreans, Gauss and Riemann, the answer is,
absolutely not. The only magnitude appropriate to the square is one
which expresses the dynamic relationship between length and area, which
the Pythagoreans demonstrated is incommensurable with a linear
magnitude. Similarly, the only magnitude appropriate to the cube is one
that expresses the dynamic relationship between length, area and volume.
Under this cubic magnitude, all subsumed relationships are redefined.
For example, the relationship between length and area in a cubic
magnitude is different from the relationship of length and area in the
square one. As the constructions of Plato and Archytas demonstrate, each
object is generated by a distinct principle. Each is the product of a
different physical manifold, with a specific number of principles and a
distinct characteristic curvature
^[17](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote17)^ .

Riemann freed science from the crippling effects of trying to
investigate the physical universe using the arbitrary measuring rods and
clocks of absolute Euclidean space and time. Once freed, the physical
universe itself designates the appropriate quantities by which it should
be measured. Just as the Pythagoreans' demonstration of the difference
between a line, square, and cube, Cusa's insistence that the curved can
never be measured by the straight, or Kepler's understanding that the
planet's motion defined the meaning of time, Riemann's concept of
*physically determined n-tply extended manifolds* defined a new form of
magnitude. One form of such *n-tply* extended magnitudes, relevant to
the study of physical economy, is the modern notion of a *tensor* .

*A tensor is a type of quantity in which the dynamically connected
relations, within and among, n-tply extended manifolds, are expressed as
a unified magnitude* .

While there are formal mathematical expressions of a tensor, such as
that presented in Eisenhart's text, and while these formulas are, at
times, useful, such expressions in formulas do not truly embody
Riemann's idea. The idea must be gained first, before the formulas. As
Riemann indicated in the fragmentary note above, this is best achieved
through the pedagogical use of geometrical examples. In this respect,
Riemann is echoing Plato, Cusa and Gauss who all emphasized the
metaphorical employment of geometry for the communication of concepts
that lay outside the domain of sense perception. In such cases, all
warned, that though the geometrical examples are indispensable for our
understanding, they are a guide to, not a substitute for, the conception
from which they are generated. In his habilitation dissertation Riemann
issued a similar admonition:

These relations of measure can be investigated only in abstract notions
of magnitude and can be exhibited connectedly only in formulae; upon
certain assumptions, however, one is able to resolve them into relations
which are separately capable of being represented geometrically, and by
this means it becomes possible to express geometrically the results of
the calculation. Therefore if one is to reach solid ground, an abstract
investigation in formulae is indeed unavoidable, but its results will
allow an exhibition in the clothing of geometry. For both parts the
foundations are contained in the celebrated treatise of Privy Councillor
Gauss upon curved surfaces.

::: {align="justify"}
:::

The modern notion of a tensor arises directly from Riemann's preliminary
idea of the nature of an *n-tply* extended magnitude. In developing this
idea, Riemann extended Gauss's notions of curvature and metric relations
from his doubly-extended surfaces to Riemann's *n-tply* extended
manifolds. From this standpoint, curvature expresses the dynamic
interacting relationship of the *n* physical principles acting in the
manifold, while the metric expresses the behavior of the least-action
pathways, i.e. geodesics, expressed in the manifold. To grasp these
points, one must bear Riemann's admonition in mind. Use the example of
Gauss's concepts of curvature and metric as a special case, and imagine
the extension of these concepts into manifolds that cannot be directly
visualized. What is lost by not being able to visualize such manifolds
from the outside, is gained by being compelled to discover their nature
from the inside. Begin by extending the idea of a curved surface to a
concept of curvature for a triply-extended magnitude--a, so-to-speak,
curved volume. To do this one must be ruthless in rejecting the *a
priori* notions of Euclidean space. Such a curved volume is not a big
square box in which curved action occurs, but a physical manifold
defined by the action of three physical principles, or one principle
acting in three directions, as for example in the case of the magnetic
field of the earth. If one now imagines moving around in such a
manifold, (such as the motion of a compass needle as it moves through
the earth's magnetic field), one would experience a changing effect of
the physical principles as a distinct change in curvature in each of (in
this example) three directions. However the ability to establish any
visual representation (even one as inadequate as the one just given), of
this same characteristic in a manifold greater than three, is futile.
Nevertheless, a precise concept of such multiply-extended curvature can
be formed in the mind.

Riemann generalized this concept showing that at any point in an
*n-tply* extended manifold there are *n(n-1)/2* distinct surface
directions intersecting, each with its own unique curvature, which
together determine the curvature of the manifold acting on that point
^[18](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote18)^ These
curvatures, all of which can be completely different, can be measured,
as Gauss did, as the proportion between a geodesic triangle's angular
excess, or defect and the area of that triangle encompasses.
^[19](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote19)^ Riemann
defined the measure of curvature at each point of the manifold as the
magnitude that expresses the *n(n-1)/2* distinct surface curvatures at
that point--a magnitude that is now called the *Riemann curvature
tensor* .

*This tensor is not a single number. It is a magnitude that expresses
how the n(n-1)/2 distinct curvatures are changing at each point, and,
how this change changes, from place to place in the manifold* . Each
distinct curvature measures the change within one of the intersecting
surfaces. But, just as the cubic magnitude defines the relationship
between length and area differently than the square magnitude, Riemann's
curvature tensor defines each lower component curvature from the
standpoint of the dynamics of the manifold as a whole.

In the case of Gauss's doubly-extended manifolds *n(n-1)/2* equals one.
Consequently, the curvature tensor has one component--Gauss's measure of
curvature as defined above.
^[20](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote20)^ For a
triply-extended manifold, (a curved "volume"), *n(n-1)/2* equals three.
Thus, to define the measure of curvature at a point of a triply-extended
manifold requires a tensor, that express the functional relationship
among three component functions, each of which expresses the changing
curvature of a surface. The curvature tensor, therefore, expresses the
changing relationship among these three measures of curvature, *as a
single, subsuming, type of function* . Again, the three-foldedenss of
this magnitude cannot be expressed simply by one number, or simply by
three individual measures of curvature. Rather, one *n-tply* extended
magnitude, or tensor, is required.

For a quadruply extended manifold, six surface directions will intersect
at each point, establishing a Riemann curvature tensor expressing a
functional relationship among these six distinct measures of curvature.

Though such a manifold cannot be directly visualized, with Riemann's
approach, its measure of curvature can be clearly defined.

In addition to this notion of curvature of an *n-tply* extended
manifold, Riemann defined the concept of an *n-tply* extended metric. To
do this he extended Gauss's generalization of the Pythagorean metric of
the geodesic from doubly-extended to *n-tply* extended manifolds. Recall
that Gauss showed that for a doubly-extended manifold the length of the
geodesics are expressed by three functions of the two parameters that
define the surface.
^[21](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote21)^ These three
functions express the relationship between the length of a geodesic and
the changing curvature of the surface.

For a triply-extended manifold, one can imagine, that instead of the
geodesic changing with respect to two parameters (surface differential),
it is changing with respect to three, which form, so to speak, a volume
differential. As this volume differential moves around the manifold, the
length of the geodesic it contains changes. To express the relationship
between the length of the geodesic and the three parameters that define
the volume differential requires a tensor that expresses a function
among six functions.

Again, as inadequate as this visualization is for a triply-extended
manifold, even such an indirect visualization is impossible for
manifolds whose extension is greater than three. Nevertheless, Riemann
developed a precise concept of such an *n-tply* extended metric. He
showed that in an *n-tply* extended manifold there are, in principle,
*n(n+1)/2* functions of the manifold's *n* physical parameters,
necessary to define the metric.
^[22](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote22)^ These
*n(n+1)/2* functions have since become known as the *Riemann metric
tensor* . They express the changing effect of the curvature of the
manifold on the measurements of the lengths of the geodesic lines.

The above examples, though somewhat abstract, nevertheless provide a
basis for forming a pedagogical (as opposed to merely formal) conception
of the Riemann curvature and metric tensors. *Broadly defined, the
notion of a Riemannian tensor expresses a definite set of functional
relationships among the n physical principles acting together to produce
the total effect in an n-tply extended manifold of physical action* .

Further, Riemann's extension of Gauss's notions of curvature to *n-tply*
extended manifolds provides a means to determine the physical
characteristics of such a manifold from the infinitesimal expressions of
those characteristics, i.e. from inside the manifold.

Riemann not only developed the form of the relevant tensors, he also
provided an experimental example and elaborated a means for their
calculation. In an 1861 paper submitted to the Paris Academy of Science
in response to a prize question concerning determining the flow of heat
in a homogenous solid body as a function of time and two other
variables, Riemann developed a physical example of the curvature of an
*n-tply* extended manifold. In that paper Riemann wrote:

The expression (insert expression for the generalized Pythagorean) can
be regarded as a linear element in a general *n* -fold extended space
lying outside our intuition. If in this space we draw all possible
shortest lines from the point (s ~1~ ,s ~2~ ,...s ~n~ ) whose initial
directions are characterized by the relations: ? *d* s ~1~ +??s ~1~ ; ?
*d* s ~2~ +??s ~2~ ;...; ? *d* s ~n~ +??s ~n~ (? and ? being arbitrary
quantities), these lines form a certain surface that can be thought of
as situated in the usual space of our intuition. In that case the
expression will be a measure of the curvature of the surface at the
point (s ~1~ ,s ~2~ ,...s ~n~ ).
^[23](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote23)^

The spinning top, discussed in the last installment of this series,
provides another pedagogical example of a manifold of physical action in
which tensors are required to express the physical action.
^[24](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote24)^ As discussed
previously, the top's motion is the result of its changing relationship
to the gravitational potential and the angular momentum generated by the
top's spinning. The effect of each is expressed by a vector comprising
three component functions. Thus, to express the top's motion requires a
tensor expressing the changing relationship of the two vectors. This
tensor expresses the physical manifold in which the top is spinning,
which, as Felix Klein himself was forced to admit, expresses an
anti-Euclidean manifold. But, unlike Klein, who pompously insisted that
this anti-Euclidean manifold is purely mathematical and has no
metaphysical significance, this anti-Euclidean manifold is the only one
with both physical and metaphysical reality.

One of the more famous examples of an application of Riemannian-type
tensors to physics is Albert. Einstein's use of them in his general
theory of relativity in which he expressed the gravitational
relationships of physical space-time by a complex of tensors.

These cited examples, however, only scratch the surface. They are
examples of the investigations of physical manifolds in which the
principles acting are limited to those associated with the abiotic
domain. In the *n-tply* extended manifolds studied in the science of
physical economy, physical principles of the biotic and cognitive
domains are also acting. Further, the relationships between these
principles *are dynamically anti-entropic* . *Thus an extension of
Riemannian-type tensors is required to express the dynamic relationship
among manifolds of increasing degrees of extension* . Before outlining
those requirements, however, it is necessary to consider the other side
of the matter investigated by Riemann.

::: {align="justify"}
:::

The Physical Topology of Self-Bounded Manifolds

::: {align="justify"}
:::

In the above discussion of the generalized form of differential
geometry, the notion of physical curvature was extended into manifolds
defined by *n* physical principles and investigated as that
characteristic is expressed in the infinitesimally small. This type of
investigation is crucial for progress in science, because it is in the
infinitesimal regions that the characteristics of curvature and metric
relations are measured, and it is from the anomalies discovered by these
measurements that the existence and nature of new physical principles
are discovered. As Riemann emphasized in his habilitation dissertation,
"Knowledge of the causal connection of phenomena is based essentially
upon the precision with which we follow them down into the infinitely
small."

However, these characteristics in the small, Riemann understood, are not
determined completely by the action in the local regions of a physical
manifold. Just as singular events that occurred thousands of years ago,
or an intention to produce a result two generations hence, determine the
immediate actions in society today, the local characteristics of a
physical manifold reflect the global nature of the manifold. Riemann
showed that these global characteristics are defined by such features as
the number of singularities and the conditions at the boundary of
action. In fact, though the local measures of curvature and metric
relations can vary quite widely within a manifold, there are certain
global characteristics which have a determining effect on their physical
significance. Riemann referred to the investigation of these global
characteristics as belonging to the domain of "analysis situs". Later,
another of Gauss's students, Johann Listing, adopted the term "topology"
(from the Greek word, "topos" meaning position) for this study. As will
become more apparent below, it is only by taking into account the
relationship between the topological and local characteristics that it
is possible to know anything fundamental about the physical process
under investigation.

In his habilitation dissertation and the fragment cited above, Riemann
indicated that the context for an investigation into this relationship
between local and topological characteristics lay in his study of
complex functions, in which he expressed the notion of a self-bounded,
multiply-connected manifold in the form of what have since become known
as Riemann surfaces. Riemann developed the initial work in this area,
under the direction of Gauss, in his 1851 doctoral dissertation. Then,
subsequent to his habilitation dissertation, Riemann deepened his
investigations in his famous studies of Abelian functions, minimal
surfaces, and hypergeometries
^[25](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote25)^ .

Though Riemann's discovery in this area is a unique advance in
knowledge, its roots reach back to Plato and the Pythagoreans, who
insisted that all investigation of the universe must begin with a
conception of the nature of the universe as a whole. In the *Timaeus* ,
Plato expressed this nature as the monotheistic concept that the
universe is a single creation of a single creator. Plato states that the
geometrical expression of such a self-bounded universe would take a
spherical form:

Now for that living creature which is designed to embrace within itself
all living creatures the fitting shape will be that which comprises
within itself all the shapes there are; wherefore He wrought it into a
round, in the shape of a sphere, equidistant in all directions from the
center to extremities, which of all shapes is the most perfect and the
most self-similar, since He deemed that the similar is infinitely fairer
than the dissimilar. And on the outside round about, it was all made
smooth with great exactness, and that for many reasons.

::: {align="justify"}
:::

Riemann reaffirmed this notion of a finite, self-bounded universe in his
habilitation dissertation, except from the higher standpoint of his
notion of a multiply-extended manifold:

The unlimitedness of space has therefore a greater certainty,
empirically, than any experience of the external. From this, however,
follows in no wise its infiniteness, but on the contrary space would
necessarily be finite, if one assumes that bodies are independent of
situation and so ascribes to space a constant measure of curvature,
provided this measure of curvature had any positive value however small.
If one were to prolong the elements of direction, that lie in any
element of surface, into shortest lines (geodetics), one would obtain an
unlimited surface with constant positive measure of curvature,
consequently a surface which would take on, in a triply extended
manifold, the form of a spherical surface, and would therefore be
finite.

::: {align="justify"}
:::

Plato emphasized that the topological characteristic of a self-bounded
universe also determines a characteristic which modern science would
identify as "quantization". This is expressed, from Plato's perspective,
by the uniqueness of the five regular Platonic and semi-regular
Archimedean solids as the unique divisions of the spherical surface.
^[26](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote26)^ Further
progress was made in this area by the investigations of Luca Pacioli and
Leonardo da Vinci, particularly the latter's emphasis on the
significance into these matters for the distinction between the abiotic
and biotic domains. Significant new advances to this understanding were
added by Kepler's discovery of a new form of regular solid, the
so-called Kepler-Poinsot stellated solids, and Napier's contemporaneous
discovery of the pentagramma mirificum. With the crystallographic
studies reported in his snowflake paper, Kepler extended this notion
into the domain of triply-extended manifolds, as later indicated by
Riemann in the above cited section of his habilitation dissertation.

But from Archytas's construction for the doubling of the cube, to
Kepler's determination of the elliptical nature of the planetary orbits,
the experimental evidence indicated that physical action was bounded by
a higher form of action than that expressed by these concepts of
spherical action.

The solution to this paradox began to come more fully to light with such
discoveries as Gauss's renewed look at the regular and semi-regular
solids from the standpoint of the general principles of curvature,
reviewed above, his discovery of the connection of Napier's pentagramma
mirificum to elliptical functions, his work on the significance of the
arithmetic-geometric mean, and the implications of his insights into the
division of the circle, the ellipse and biquadratic residues.

These discoveries presaged Riemann's insight into the deeper nature of
topological effects, which he developed in his study of minimal
surfaces, Abelian and hypergeometric functions
^[27](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote27)^ . In these
studies, Riemann developed a concept of a higher notion of
self-boundedness, which was expressed by the succession of relatively
self-bounded manifolds associated with the Riemann surfaces generated
with respect to the extended class of transcendental functions known as
Abelian functions. Riemann showed that each species of transcendental is
associated with an increasing density of singularities, which is
expressed in the corresponding Riemann surface by a change in their
topological characteristics. (See Figure 10.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure010-riemann68.gif"
height="244" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure010-riemann68.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"244\" width=\"720\" />

It is this Riemannian notion of self-boundedness which is the relevant
approach to modern physical science.

The essential characteristic of these Riemann surfaces, Riemann
insisted, is their expression of what he called, "Dirichlet's
Principle", ^[28](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote28)^ a
physical principle he adopted from his teacher, Lejeune Dirichlet, whose
lectures on Gauss's theory of potential, Riemann had attended at the
University of Berlin. In these studies, Gauss and Dirichlet had
generalized Leibniz's initial work on dynamics, through the study of
gravity, magnetism and electricity. Like Leibniz, Gauss and Dirichlet
emphasized that the specific characteristics of a physical action are
the effect of the least-action properties, "potential", of the physical
principles governing that action. Gauss defined as the "potential
function" , the function that expresses the characteristic curvature
expressed by these least-action properties. In other words, physical
principles such as gravity, magnetism and electricity establish an
*anti* -Euclidean manifold, whose nature can be expressed by the general
principles of curvature that Gauss had developed. In the lectures which
Riemann attended, Dirichlet emphasized that this potential function was
expressed by a set of harmonic functions, i.e. functions whose rate of
change of curvature is equal in magnitude and perpendicular in
direction, and that such harmonic functions necessarily expressed the
least-action properties of the potential.

Further, Gauss and Dirichlet also recognized that the specific
characteristics of a potential function were determined by the
conditions at the boundary of action. For example, the surface of a
magnet or of the Earth, in the case of magnetism or gravity, or the
conditions at the boundary of a heat conducting body, as in the example
developed by Riemann cited above. From this, Dirichlet showed that the
characteristics of the potential function throughout the manifold could
be specified by the boundary conditions, and changed when those
conditions changed. (See Figure 11.).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure011-riemann68.gif"
height="288" width="288"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure011-riemann68.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"288\" width=\"288\" />

Riemann went still further. He recognized that Dirichlet's principle
expresses a unique characteristic of functions of a complex variable.
When such functions are represented by Riemann's surfaces, Dirichlet's
principle is extended to include physical manifolds with an increasing
density of singularities, as Riemann showed in his work on Abelian and
hypergeometric functions.

This meant that Riemann could demonstrate the relationship between the
characteristics of curvature in the infinitesimally small, and the
global characteristics of the manifold, specifically the number,
characteristics and density of singularities.

This can be pedagogically illustrated by example. First, take the
sphere, which is the form of the Riemann surface for the simple
transcendental functions associated with the circular, hyperbolic and
exponential functions. Each such function defines a different set of
Gaussian parameters from which the metric relationships are determined.
However, the metric relations hold only for local situations. For
example, there is only one geodesic between any two points only if those
points are close to each other. But if they are the poles, there is an
infinite number of geodesics that connect them. Riemann showed that on a
spherical surface there are inherently always two such poles. Such
surfaces Riemann defined as "simply-connected". Further, Riemann showed
that this is a characteristic of any simply connected surface, and since
any simply connected surface can be mapped onto the sphere without
changing its harmonic relationships (i.e., conformally), this
characteristic is "topological", i.e., independent of the particular
metric relations. Nevertheless, it determines the conditions in which
those metric relations exist.

Now look at the case of the torus, which is the surface associated with
the elliptical transcendentals. Here an entirely different situation
occurs. As Gauss and Riemann showed, this species of transcendental
expresses a higher power of physical action than the simple
transcendentals. This higher power is expressed by the increasing
density of singularities, which is expressed in the Riemann surface by a
change in the topological characteristics of the manifold. Riemann
denoted surfaces such as the torus as "doubly-connected". However,
unlike the case of simply-connected manifolds, doubly connected
manifolds cannot, in general, be conformally mapped to each other. This
means that the manifold of doubly-connected manifolds has, in a sense, a
greater degree of "quantization", as this concept was explored by Gauss
in his investigation of the arithmetic-geometric mean
^[29](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote29)^ . But, as
will become clear below, this change in topology is also associated with
a fundamental change in the global nature of the curvature of the
manifold.

This change becomes clear when Gauss's concept of curvature is combined
with the notion of the Riemann surfaces, as Riemann did in his study of
minimal surfaces. Minimal surfaces, such as the catenoid, express a
physical characteristic of least action. This characteristic is
expressed by the fact that the mean curvature of a minimal surface is
everywhere constant. Riemann showed that the Gauss maps of minimal
surfaces are conformal to the original surface. (See Figure 12.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure12a-riemann68.gif"
height="240" width="360"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure12a-riemann68.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"240\" width=\"360\" />

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure12b-riemann68.gif"
height="240" width="360"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure12b-riemann68.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"240\" width=\"360\" />

Since his surfaces generated from complex functions, reflecting the
harmonic characteristics of Gauss and Dirichlet's functions of physical
potential, also have this characteristic they imply a corresponding
Gauss map.

But, an even deeper insight comes to light when we look further into the
topological connection between the Riemann surfaces and Gauss maps.
Begin this investigation with a look at the curvature of
simply-connected surfaces. As discussed above, the parts of these
surfaces that are more curved will generate large areas on the Gauss
map, and the parts that are less curved will generate small areas on the
Gauss map. (See Figure 13.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure013-riemann68.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure013-riemann68.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

But though the curvature can vary widely from place to place on the
surface, the total curvature of the surface, that is, the Gauss map of
the entire surface, will be the same for every simply-connected surface!

This would appear to lead to a devastating conclusion if we held to the
idea that the form of the universe was simply spherical. For in such a
case, the total curvature of the universe would be fixed. Thus, the
local curvature could change, but no such changes could affect the
overall curvature of the universe itself. This idea corresponds to the
Aristotelean dogma that, though change can occur in the small, in the
overall scheme of the universe, no fundamental change is possible. This
view, of course, is contradicted by the experimental evidence of
physical science and the history of man, whose discoveries and
applications of universal principles have brought about changes that can
only be expressed as a change in the total curvature of the universe.

But, fortunately, as Riemann showed, our minds are not limited to
simply-connected manifolds. On the basis of his discoveries, we can form
a concept more appropriate to the *anti-entropic* nature of the real
universe: *a succession of manifolds of increasing connectivity
associated with an increasing change in the total curvature of the
manifold* .

Now look at the Gauss map for the torus, as an example of a
doubly-extended manifold. The outside of the torus is positively curved
and the inside negatively curved. The circles that form the boundary of
the two regions have zero curvature. Thus, the curvature of the torus is
more complex than a simply-connected surface. This becomes clear from
the Gauss maps. The outside of the torus maps to an entire sphere, and
the inside also maps to an entire sphere, except in the opposite
direction. (See Figure 14.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure014a-riemann68.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure014a-riemann68.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure014b-riemann68.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure014b-riemann68.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

The boundary circles map to the poles. Thus, the Gauss map of the torus
is itself a Riemann surface with a total curvature of zero!

This provides us with a better conception of zero curvature than the
idea of flatness. Instead of thinking of a measurement of zero curvature
as Euclidean flatness, we can think of zero curvature as the total
effect of a manifold with equal amounts of positive and negative
curvature. The local curvature in such a manifold can be either negative
or positive, as is also possible for a simply-connected surface. But the
significance of the local curvature in each manifold is entirely
different.

From this comparison of the simply connected surface with a total
curvature equal to one spherical surface, and the torus with a total
curvature of zero, it might appear that we are not heading in the
direction of a concept of a universe with a possibility of an ever
changing curvature. But this appearance is remedied when we look at the
Gauss maps for a triply-connected manifold, associated with the next
higher species of transcendental, the hyper-elliptical. (See Figure 15.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure015-riemann68.gif"
height="520" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure015-riemann68.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"520\" width=\"720\" />

Such a manifold has one positively curved region and two negatively
curved ones. Thus, the Gauss map will be one positive spherical surface
and two negative ones, for a net total curvature of -1 spherical
surface.

If we now think of the entire manifold of Riemann's surfaces, we see a
manifold of manifolds of increasing density of singularities, and with a
*discontinuously* increasingly *negative* total curvature. Such
discontinuities between changes in total curvature also corresponds to a
change resulting from the introduction of an entirely new principle
acting on the manifold. This change produces a corresponding change in
the quantization of the manifold. This idea, combined with Riemann's
idea of *n-tply* extended magnitudes, *tensors* , is the basic concept
necessary to approach an investigation of the physical economy.

That, however, requires the development of a still higher form of
tensor.

::: {align="justify"}
:::

Riemannian Tensors in Economics--A Preliminary Approach

::: {align="justify"}
:::

With everything stated above in mind, a sketch of a preliminary approach
to the construction of Riemannian-type tensor-like magnitudes
appropriate to expressing physical economic processes can be attempted.
The principles on which this is based have been developed thoroughly by
LaRouche in many locations, most relevantly, his recent *Dynamics &
Economy* .

Such multiply-extended magnitudes must express the interaction of
abiotic, biotic and cognitive principles, as a dynamic of the social
interaction among humans, that is itself acting on the abiotic, biotic
and cognitive domains. This dynamic cannot be treated as a fixed, even
non-linear, interaction, but as a dynamic that itself is changing due to
the willful action of the creative powers of man. Thus, the
physical-economic manifold of action must be considered as *the manifold
of the increasing potential to produce ideas* .

As such, no form of an array or matrix of data and functions (even
algebraically non-linear ones), such as are indicated by the formal
mathematical treatment of tensors, is adequate. Rather, these
physical-economic tensor-like quantities are better expressed by the
form of animations specified by LaRouche.

For example, the principle of universal gravitation cannot be expressed
as an array of mathematical relations, either in the form modern science
textbooks display as "Kepler's laws", or, more falsely, as a consequence
of the degenerate form of Newton's inverse square formulation. Any
truthful expression of the principle of universal gravitation must
express that principle as a discovery acting to change the dynamic of
the universe. What must be taken into account is that gravitation was
acting as a physical principle in and on the universe prior to Kepler's
discovery and elaboration of that principle. *But with Kepler's
discovery and the propagation of that discovery through succeeding
generations, the power of the principle of gravitation changed, because
it could now act on the universe from the higher-powered domain of human
cognitive interaction, which, retrospectively, redefined the
undiscovered principle of universal gravitation as containing the
unrealized potential to produce the intended effect of its discovery.*

This type of change should be expressed in the new tensor-like
magnitudes as a *discontinuous* change in the total characteristic
curvature of the manifold of physical economy, of the type associated
with Riemann's treatment of such a change in power with respect to the
Abelian transcendentals.

This change in total curvature is associated with a change in the
infinitesimal, or local curvature of the manifold of physical economic
processes. To establish a notion of local curvature requires a complete
and total rejection of any notions of Euclidean-type absolute time.
Events that are widely separated by one measure of time, are,
nevertheless, simultaneous, with respect to another. For example, the
conflict in ancient Athens between Socrates and the Sophists is
separated from events today by more than two thousand revolutions of the
earth around the Sun. Nevertheless, the effects of these events are
acting in the universe today as efficiently as then. Similarly, intended
events that are yet to occur, such as the successful establishment of
human habitation of Mars, have an immediate effect on the conduct of
human activity on Earth today. Consequently, a conception of physical
economic local curvature must consider actions as simultaneously, *both*
widely separated and virtually instantaneous.
^[30](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote30)^

The above indicated role of human cognition in the development of the
universe is expressed by man's increasing power in and over the abiotic,
biotic, and cognitive domains through progress in science and art. Thus,
the development of the universe as a whole is the effect of the
increasing potential of the creative powers of man. Consequently,
physical economic progress can be expressed by that increasing potential
to generate creative ideas.

However, such ideas are not generated in the universe as a whole, but by
the dyanamic relationship of the universe to the sovereign, *willful* ,
creative powers of the individual human mind. This "local action"
affects, and is affected by, the total creative potential of mankind,
and potentially, the universe as a whole. From the standpoint of the
physical economy, this is expressed by the physical economic
relationship of the household to the economy as a whole.

The primary physical economic activity of a household is the ability to
produce, the *potential* to produce, creative ideas from among the
members of that household. That potential is a function of the physical
economic conditions, i.e. hard infrastructure (such as water, power,
transportation, etc.), level of technology, and soft infrastructure
(such as education, cultural and health, etc.) available to the members
of that household, through the action of universal principles acting on
this "local" moment from throughout space-time.

Thus, the tensor-like quantity associated with the measure of local
physical economic curvature must express the intersection, at a point in
the physical economic manifold, of the dynamically interacting
curvatures of the physical and cultural principles, acting from
throughout time, that are affecting, and being affected by, the creative
powers of the individuals of that household.

It may seem that this tensor-like quantity contains so many components
that its actual form is virtually impossible to express. However, this
is true only if a formal mathematical expression is sought. Gauss and
Riemann both showed that their functions of curvature could take
extremely complicated forms when expressed in formulas. Consequently,
they sought, and found, means to express the essential characteristics
in physical-geometric garb. The equivalent means for these physical
economic tensor-like quantities are the physical economic animations
designed by LaRouche.

In addition to curvature, the metric relations of the physical economy
also can be expressed by tensor-like magnitudes. This is also best
illustrated by example.

Look at the level of transportation available to the households of the
U.S.A. , which define a certain metric relationship between the
households and the economy as a whole, expressed as a geodesic in
physical economic space-time. This can be initially expressed by the
relationship among the various forms of water, rail, road, air,
pedestrian, bicycle, etc. transport accessible to that household, which
define a least-action pathway for that relationship. But the economic
significance of these forms of transport is relative to their
relationship to the organization of the economy as a whole.

To express this, one must look, as LaRouche suggested in his December
15, 2005 *Rebuilding the U.S.A.: Travel Among Cities* , at the
development of the transportation of North America from the early 17th
century onward. The physical geography of North America in the early 17
^th^ century can be characterized by a certain level of connectivity
associated with bays, inlets and river systems of the eastern coast, the
Appalachian mountain range, the Great Lakes, and the Ohio and
Mississippi-Missouri river systems. This level of connectivity is the
result of the bio-geological action from the beginning of the last ice
age.

This physical economic geography implies a potential continental
connectivity that can only be realized by the intervention of man. The
realization of that potential began with the development of water and
road systems within the eastern regions, followed by the initial
attempts to construct the systems to connect the costal region to the
continental interior, and to connect the river systems of the Ohio and
Mississippi river valleys together and to the Great Lakes.

The possibility to do this depended on the application of man's creative
powers to transform the bio-geological activity, as typified by the
construction of the Saugus iron works in the 17 ^th^ century
Massachusetts Bay Colony. This integrated manufacturing facility
utilized the water and biological capacity of the region to transform
bog iron into tools, nails and other useful items. The creation and
application of such "abiotic" products of biological and cognitive
action, further transformed the bio-geological characteristics of the
area. This transformation was the result of, and integral to, the
process which created a new social organization of man: the American
republic, the which made possible and necessitated an increase in the
physical-economic connectivity of the continent. This increase in
connectivity, effected through this interaction between abiotic, biotic
and cognitive processes, produced a corresponding increase in the
potential to increase the physical economic connectivity.

The introduction of rail changed this potential dramatically, not as a
substitute for water and road, but as a transformation of their
relationship to a higher form of physical economic connectivity. The
subsequent completion of the transcontinental railroad, the development
of a continental system of highways and air transport, further increased
the physical economic activity. This increase of connectivity must be
seen in light of corresponding increases in power generation,
locomotion, etc.

Further, this increase in connectivity must also be seen with respect to
the intention of which it is an effect. For example, the development of
the interstate highway system as a supplement to a national rail, water
and air transportation system linking concentrated small, medium and
large agro-industrial centers created by FDR's economic mobilization
during the middle of the last century, defines a certain qualitative
increase of economic connectivity. But, as an auxiliary of an intended
run-up in real-estate values, it becomes what it has become, a virtual
coast to coast parking lot on which the majority of Americans waste
billions of man hours per day, thus, decreasing the physical economic
connectivity of the continent.

Still further, when this continental transportation system is seen as
part of a global network whose intended effect is to increase the
physical economic connectivity of mankind, for the purpose of the
development of the continents of the earth, and integrated into the
development of a system of transport linking these parts of the earth to
nearby space, the moon, mars and beyond, an even higher quality of
physical economic connectivity is realized, with the corresponding
effect on the physical economic potential of the individual members of
society to produce creative ideas.

These changes are reflected as a corresponding change in the metric
relations of physical economic space and time expressed by a change in
the geodesics that express the paths of least-action in the physical
economy. This change defines the types of characteristics that must be
expressed by a metric tensor of physical economic space-time.

The only appropriate means for expressing such relationships are
tensor-like magnitudes that supercede the tensors of the Riemannian
type, the development of which, with the corresponding implications for
the physical and biological sciences, stands at the forefront of science
today.

::: {align="justify"}
:::

::: {align="justify"}
:::

::: {align="justify"}
:::

.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

NOTES

1\. []{#Footnote1} Lyndon H. LaRouche has added the following point of
emphasis:

What needs to be stressed, is the crucial distinction from the usual
presentation of the tensor, from a mathematical formalist standpoint, to
the tensor defined, as a physical conception, that from the standpoint
of physical anti-entropy.

The Riemannian tensor, as a physical conception, is intended to
represent a principle of anti-entropic disequilibrium: the actual
characteristic of the physical universe.

So, the concept of the Riemannian tensor does not proceed from the
mathematical formality to the physical reality, but, rather,
superimposes the concept of physical anti-entropy on the mere
mathematical scheme.

Think, for example, of the generation of the Kepler solar system, of the
World Harmonics, from a lonely, fast-spinning Sun. The universe is
driven by an ontological conception of universal anti-entropy; that is
what the experimental evidence shows. The mathematical conception must
be enslaved to the characteristic physical-experimental actuality.

There is where the lurking bear-trap lies, waiting to snare the
mathematical formalist!

2\. []{#Footnote2} Luther Pfahler Eisenhart *Riemannian Geometry* ,
Princeton University Press, 1926.

3\. []{#Footnote3} This, of course, is a characteristic of all
sophistry. The Sophist lies, but never explicitly states what he is
lying about.

4\. []{#Footnote4} Once stated in this ironical form, a means of
calculation can be elaborated. As Napier's development of logarithms,
Leibniz's calculation of Pi, or Gauss's development of the
hypergeoemtric series all indicate, such means of calculations must
express the ambiguities intrinsic to the original ironical form. This is
distinct from today's digital processors, who substitute real thought
for rapid brute force iterations.

5\. []{#Footnote5} One sees this feudalist conception of the universe
revived today in such popularly held beliefs as the so-called Copenhagen
interpretation of quantum mechanics, or the radical forms of information
theory associated with Wiener, von Neumann, et al., which insist that
the universe is fundamentally random and devoid of any possibility of
comprehension by man other than statistical description. This is the
argument that was at the core of the famous Einstein-Born
correspondence. See: *The Born-Einstein Letters* , Macmillian, 2005, and
Bruce Director, On the 375 ^th^ Anniversary of Kepler's Passing, Riemann
for Anti-Dummies 65, www.wlym.com

6\. []{#Footnote6} Kepler, *The Harmony of the World,* p. 496 *,*
translated by E.J. Aiton, A.M. Duncan, J.V. Field American Philosophical
Society, 1997.

7\. []{#Footnote7} See Johann Bernoulli, *Die Erste Integralrechnung* ,
1691, translated into German from the Latin by Dr. Gerhard Kowalewski
<http://historical.library.cornell.edu/math/index.html> , G.W. Leibniz,
*Two Papers on the Catenary Curve and Logarithmic Curve* , Acta
Eruditorum 1691, translated into English by Pierre Beaudry, Fidelio
Magazine, [www.schillerinstitute.org](http://www.schillerinstitute.org/)
, Bruce Director, *Justice for the Catenary* , Riemann for Anti-Dummies
,Part10, *Long Life of the Catenary* , [Riemann for Anti-Dummies, Part
41](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part41.html)

8\. []{#Footnote8} See LaRouche, *Principle of Powers, Box 12* ,
Executive Intelligence Review, December 23, 2005,
[www.larouchepub.com](http://www.larouchepub.com/)

9\. []{#Footnote9} See Boston LYM [pedagogy on
catenary](http://wlym.com/tiki/tiki-index.php?page=Paperclip%20Pedagogy%20for%20Calculus%20and%20Catenaries)
.

10\. []{#Footnote10} Leibniz showed this to be the arithmetic mean
between two exponential functions, a fact with enormous metaphysical
implications. (Leibniz, Op. Cit.)

11\. []{#Footnote11} Gauss, Carl, *Disquisitiones Generales Circa
Superficies Curvas,* 1828, Gauss *Werke* Vol. IV

12\. []{#Footnote12} In astronomy and geodesy, the normal is the plumb
bob and the sphere is the celestial sphere.

13\. []{#Footnote13} The normal, being perpendicular to the surface, is
extending into the space outside the surface.

14\. []{#Footnote14} Gauss's investigation of the properties of shortest
lines goes back to some of his earliest reflections on the insanity of
Euclidean geometry. One of his earliest entries in his diaries is a
remark about the Euclidean definition of a plane. For Gauss, the
characteristics of a plane and line could not be given *a priori* , but
only as a consequence of the physical characteristics (curvature) of the
surface.

15\. []{#Footnote15} A similar relationship exists for any polygon.

16\. []{#Footnote16} See LaRouche, *Principle of Power box 5* , Op. Cit.

17\. []{#Footnote17} See Bruce Director, *Archytas From the Standpoint
of Cusa, Gauss and Riemann,* [Riemann for Anti-Dummies, Part
42](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part42.html)

18\. []{#Footnote18} In the example of a triply-extended manifold there
would therefore be three surfaces intersecting at each point.

19\. []{#Footnote19} Tuillio Levi-Civita, who was a student of Gegorio
Ricci, who in turn was a student of Riemann's collaborator Enrico Betti
later introduced another, even simpler, way to find the curvature of a
surface element by measuring the change in the direction of a vector
that results when that vector is transported around a small area of the
surface, so as to always remain parallel to itself. Intuitively it would
seem that such an action would not cause a change in the direction of
the vector. On a flat surface that is true. But if the surface has any
curvature at all, the curvature itself will cause a change in the
direction. (See Figure 9.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure09-riemann68.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure09-riemann68.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

20\. []{#Footnote20} It is important to note that that one component
expresses the dynamic relationship between the two parameters that
define the surface.

21\. []{#Footnote21} Denoted E, F, and G by Gauss.

22\. []{#Footnote22} These functions are the extension of Gauss's
functions E, F, and G for surfaces.

23\. []{#Footnote23} Riemann, Bernhard, *Mathematische Werke* . Berlin
1990, p. 435. Translation from Kolmogorov, Yushkevich, *Mathematics of
the 19 ^th^ Century* , translated by Roger Cooke, Birkhauser Verlag,
Berlin, 1996, p. 85.

24\. []{#Footnote24} See Bruce Director, *View from the Top,* [Riemann
for Anti-Dummies, Part 67](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part67.html)

25\. []{#Footnote25} See B., Riemann, *Beitrage zur Theorie der durch
die Gauss'sche Riehe...; Theorie der Abel'schen Functionen; Ueber die
Flache vom kleinsten Inhalt bei gegebener Begrenzung,* Riemann's
*Mathematische Werke* , Leipzig, 1892.

26\. []{#Footnote26} See Hal Vaughn, *Archimedean Polyhedra and the
Boundary: The Missing Link* , Twenty-First Century Science and
Technology, Summer 2005.

27\. []{#Footnote27} See B. Riemann, Op. Cit; Bruce Director, *Riemann
for Anti-Dummies Parts 52, 54, 61, 64.*

28\. []{#Footnote28} See LaRouche, *Vernadsky and Dirichlet's Principle*
and Bruce Director, *Bernhard Riemann's Dirichlet's Principle* ,
[Riemann for Anti-Dummies Part
58](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part58.html)

29\. []{#Footnote29} See Carl Gauss, *Nachlass zur Theorie Des
Arithmetishc-Geometrischen Mittels und der Modulfunktion* , uebersetzt
und herausgegeben von Dr. Harald Geppert, Ostwaldt's Klassiker der
Exakten Wissenschaften, Akademische Verlagsgesellschaft M.B.H. Leipzig,
1927; Bruce Director, *Gauss's Arithmetic-Geometric Mean: A Matter of
Precise Ambiguity* , [Riemann for Anti-Dummies, Part
66](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part66.html)

30\. []{#Footnote30} The paradigm for such a notion of time is Kepler's
notion of time with respect to planetary orbits. The planet's action at
any instant is only known as its relationship to the whole orbit.
Kepler's principle of equal areas expresses this notion of time.
:::

::: {.addtoany_share_save_container .addtoany_content_bottom}
::: {.a2a_kit .a2a_kit_size_32 .addtoany_list a2a-url="http://lymcanada.org/68/" a2a-title="Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 68 :  An Insider"}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F68%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2068%20%3A%20%20An%20Insider "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F68%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2068%20%3A%20%20An%20Insider "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/google_plus?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F68%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2068%20%3A%20%20An%20Insider "Google+"){.a2a_button_google_plus}
[](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd .addtoany_share_save}
:::
:::
:::

[ [ Posted on ]{.screen-reader-text} [February 20, 2010 February 24,
2019](http://lymcanada.org/68/) ]{.posted-on} [ [ [ Author
]{.screen-reader-text} [Bruce
Director](http://lymcanada.org/author/bdirector/){.url .fn .n} ]{.author
.vcard} ]{.byline} [ [ Categories ]{.screen-reader-text}
[EN](http://lymcanada.org/category/en/) , [Riemmann for
Anti-Dummies](http://lymcanada.org/category/science-1/c132-riemmann-for-anti-dummies/)
]{.cat-links}

::: post-thumbnail
![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){.attachment-post-thumbnail
.size-post-thumbnail .wp-post-image width="472" height="480"
lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part68_files_figure001-riemann68.gif"}

\<img width=\"472\" height=\"480\"
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/wlym.com_antidummies_part68_files_figure001-riemann68.gif\"
class=\"attachment-post-thumbnail size-post-thumbnail wp-post-image\"
alt=\"\" />
:::

::: entry-header
# Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 68 : An Insider {#riemann-for-anti-dummies-part-68-an-insider-1 .entry-title}
:::

::: entry-content
::: pf-content
August 28, 2006

::: {align="justify"}
:::

## An Insider's Guide to the Universe

::: {align="justify"}
:::

by Bruce Director

Though all humans are blessed to spend eternity inside the universe,
many squander the mortal portion, deluded they are somewhere else. These
assumed "outsiders" acquire an obsessive belief in a fantasy world whose
nature is determined by { *a priori* } axiomatic assumptions of the
deluded's choosing, and an insistence that any experimental evidence
contradicting these axioms must be either disregarded, or, if grudgingly
acknowledged, determined to be from "outside" their world. Typical of
such beliefs are the notions of Euclidean geometry, empiricism,
positivism, existentialism, or that most pernicious of pathologies
afflicting our culture today: Baby-Boomerism.

[ ]{#more-1191}

Since it is inevitable that those afflicted with this mental disease
will experience occasions (at least one is guaranteed, though many are
likely), in which they will confront the fallacy of their beliefs,
dissecting their delusions primarily provides clinical evidence relevant
to psycho-pathologists. While the study of such pathologies is essential
to the identification of disease, the treatment and prevention demands a
positive conception of health. Thus the continued development of the
human condition requires the happy investigation of the real world that
humans have been designed to inhabit. As the history of mankind's
increasing dominance in and over the universe demonstrates, it is the
natural proclivity of man to do that. Fortunately, as Plato, Cusa,
Leibniz and Kepler all emphasized, the universe has been created to this
end, for cognition is a pervasive and efficient principle { *in* } the
universe. Further, the entire universe is at work in every infinitesimal
part, accessible to being grasped, and acted upon, by the human mind.

The most advanced approach to such an investigation of the universe
"from the inside", was laid down by Riemann in his famous 1854
habilitation dissertation. As revolutionary as it was ancient, Riemann
insisted on a return to { *ante* }-Euclidean sanity, demanding that
science abandon the acceptance of axiomatic systems, and proceed solely
on the basis of hypotheses generated from the investigation of physical
principles. The problem Riemann faced was that, for more than two
thousand years, scientists had become indoctrinated into accepting
psuedo-systems (such as Euclidean geometry), as the prerequisite
scaffold on which science must be built, either as the accepted, but
assumed false, form of expressing a true discovery, or, as in the case
of Aristotelianism, the actual form of human knowledge. Riemann
recognized, as did his sponsor in this project, C. F. Gauss, and Gauss's
sponsor, A. G. Kaestner, that, whether as a means of expression, or as
an actually held false belief, Aristotelean and Euclidean-type dogmas
were obstructions that imprisoned the mind inside a false world,
rendering it only capable of peering, impotently, into what the victim
believed to be an outer, real world.

Consequently, for science to make progress, this distinction must be
broken. There { *is* } no outside. *There is one, self-bounded universe,
whose progressive development is characterized by an anti-entropic
tendency towards higher states of organization and existence, which is
knowable from the inside through the cognitive powers embodied in the
human mind* . *The appropriate form of expression of this physical
reality, is, for modern science, based on the conception of a Riemannian
tensor ^[1](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote1)^ .*

On the occasion of his habilitation dissertation, Riemann elaborated the
method by which this insider's science must proceed. In so doing, he
gave voice to the actual form of discovery that underlay every advance
in science, from the ancient discoveries associated with the
Egyptian-Pythagorean science of { *Sphaerics* }, through Gauss's
then-recent accomplishments in astronomy, geodesy, geomagnetism,
electrodynamics and epistemology. But he went further, generalizing this
method to a degree never before achieved, whose full implications are
only now coming to light with LaRouche's discoveries in the domain of
the science of physical economy, and the elaboration of those ideas
through the ongoing research project of economic animations currently
being developed, under LaRouche's personal direction, by a team of young
thinkers from the LaRouche Youth Movement.

Nevertheless, reaction dies hard. As soon as Riemann's audible words
faded away, his method came under attack. At first this attack took the
form of stone cold silence. After Riemann's premature death, the assault
took on a more sophistical form. While his students and collaborators
continued to animate his ideas, his enemies attempted to suffocate his
program under a system of mathematical formalism, typified by the
presentation in Luther Pfahler Eisenhart's 1926 treatise, *Riemannian
Geometry* ^[2](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote2)^ . The
problem with such treatments as Eisenhart's is not the use of
mathematical formulas as such (for Riemann utilized certain formal
expressions himself), but the substitution of formal expressions, for
Riemann's actual ideas. In so doing, Riemann's enemies succeeded, at
least in part, in imposing a new form of Euclidean dogma, under the
guise of a neo-Euclidean formalism maliciously misnamed "Riemannian
Geometry". Since the effect of this sophistry has now brought science,
and in a broader sense, society as a whole, to a breakdown point, it is
necessary to revive Riemann's actual approach. The first step is to
place Riemann's discovery inside the historical process in which it is
still unfolding.

::: {align="justify"}
:::

From Brunelleschi To Kepler

::: {align="justify"}
:::

Much to the dismay of the Babylonian priesthood from which the dogmas of
Euclid and Aristotle sprang, the human mind can *recognize and act* on
universal physical principles *without* resort to mathematical
formalism. Euclid's *Elements* themselves, reluctantly, but
definitively, testify to this fact. None of the discoveries reported in
Euclid's *Elements* were, or could have been, discovered by the
deductive method utilized by Euclid. As anyone who has tried to actually
recreate those discoveries for himself soon realizes, the discoveries
reported therein can only be recreated in reverse order, beginning with
the physical construction of the five regular solids as a consequence of
spherical action, then to the development of incommensurable magnitudes,
proportions and numbers, and finally to the construction of the plane
figures. Even more to the point, the devastating flaw in Euclid's
*Elements* is embedded in the characteristic which the Aristoteleans
considered its most viable attribute: the deductive method.

That flaw, as Kaestner, Gauss and Riemann emphasized, is exposed by the
*Elements'* dependence on the validity of the parallel postulate--a
proposition which cannot be proven within the deductive system on which
the *Elements* relies. As Gauss stated, without the parallel postulate,
there are no similar triangles, and without similar triangles, all the
theorems of Euclidean geometry fail. But, as Gauss also emphasized, the
parallel postulate assumes something that is nowhere stated--that the
physical universe is infinitely extended, rectilinearly, or as Gauss and
Riemann would put it: flat.
^[3](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote3)^

Though the achievements of Greek science in the generations following
Euclid (most notably the accomplishments of Archimedes, Eratosthenes,
and Aristarchus) are derived from the *ante* -Euclidean approach
associated with the astrophysics that the Egyptians and Pythagoreans
denoted as *Sphaerics* , the relative dominance of this saner form of
science began to fade with the murder of Archimedes by Roman soldiers in
approximately 212 B.C. The ensuing relative dominance of Euclidean
geometry (with the associated cultural decay of the Roman Empire praised
so highly by Lord Shelburne's Edward Gibbon), was brought to a close in
1436, with Brunelleschi's successful completion of the free-standing,
self-supporting cupola over the church of Santa Maria del Fiore in
Florence. From that time to ours, Burnelleschi's Dome stands as a
defiant reminder that the real universe is not flat, as the Euclideans
would indicate, but is determined by physical principles, which Gauss
and Riemann would later express as physical curvature (as will be
developed more fully below).

As LaRouche emphasized in 1988, to the shock of many at the time, the
principle that Brunelleschi recognized and employed in the successful
construction of the Dome, was the principle of least-action expressed by
the catenary-- a principle which was not fully elaborated until Leibniz
did so more than two hundred years later. Nevertheless, what
Brunelleschi's accomplishment demonstrates, is that the human mind is
capable of recognizing, acting on, and communicating knowledge of
physical principles without ever reducing those principles to a formal
mathematical construct. Subsequently, when Leibniz showed that the
physical principle underlying the catenary could be characterized as a
function of logarithmic functions, he gave that expression a
mathematical form. Nevertheless, the mathematical expression of
Leibniz's discovery is not the principle. It is a *rigorously ironical*
statement of the transcendental nature of the catenary principle--a
precise statement of a mathematical ambiguity from which the principle
that Leibniz discovered can be recreated anew in the mind of the
scientist. ^[4](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote4)^

The universal principle which Brunelleshi's achievement exemplifies, was
elaborated in the shadow of his newly created Dome by Nicholas of Cusa.
Writing in *De Docta Ignorantia,* among other locations, Cusa insisted,
*on epistemological grounds* , that the characteristic of action in the
physical universe is not constant, but is always changing non-uniformly.
This meant that, contrary to the Aristoteleans, physical action did not
conform to what was mathematically convenient-- perfect circles. Rather,
Cusa showed that the non-uniformity of physical action is a
characteristic of the universe's *self-perfectability* , which is a more
perfect condition than the static, unchanging sterility of a world
governed by Aristotle's perfect circles. Further, because human
creativity is central to the self-perfectability of the universe, the
mind is capable of discovering, *from within the unfolding universe* ,
the underlying principles governing it.

Cusa's work reintroduced into science the requirement to identify and
measure a physical principle by the characteristic of change expressed
by the action of that principle in the physical world--a characteristic
that Gauss and Riemann would later refer to as *curvature* . The first,
and perhaps most dramatic, application of this was Kepler's discovery of
the principle of universal gravitation.

A full pedagogical reworking of Kepler's discovery, as detailed in his
1609 *New Astronomy* , is currently being developed by a team of
researchers from the LYM, but a brief summary of the relevant points is
necessary for this discussion.

Kepler rejected the Aristotelean precept that knowledge of the physical
world must be confined to the domain of sense perception, and that
principles governing physical motion were relegated to, what was for
them, an ultimately unknowable, and unchanging, metaphysical domain. For
Aristotelean astronomers, this posed a particularly vexing problem,
because the full planetary motions extend outside the field of vision of
the observer, and the causes of that motion are completely outside the
astronomer's sensual and (for the Aristotelean), intellectual ken.
Consequently, the astronomers of the Roman period disclaimed any
truthful knowledge of planetary motion, settling for mathematical
descriptions of their speculations about how those motions might appear,
were they able to directly perceive them.

This view conformed perfectly to the prevailing feudalist opinion that
mortal man was, at best, a sophisticated beast whose cognitive powers
were outside of, and inconsequential to, the "actual" universe, which
the Aristoteleans falsely imagined to be governed by a fixed set of
eternally unchanging laws. As such, mortal man, Aristotelean opinion
held, must be governed by the, apparently chaotic, laws of animal
behavior, without recourse to universal, eternal principles, which they
insisted did not change.
^[5](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote5)^ But as a
self-avowed adherent of Cusa, Kepler realized that this view of man and
the universe was wrong. Man, through his powers of cognition, is capable
of knowing the principles governing the universe as *principles of
change,* as Heraclitus and Cusa both emphasized. Consequently, Kepler
understood the motions of the planets and man's investigation of them,
as part of a *single, unfolding, self-developing creation,* which
included the development of life and human cognition. Mortal man is not
outside the universe nor is the universe outside the province of mortal
man. Rather, mortal man, possessed with the power of cognition,
transcends mortality, playing a unique and integral role in the
eternally continuing development of the universe as a whole.

Consequently, Kepler emphasized, the best vantage point from which to
discover the principles of planetary motion is not outside, but inside
the universe:

For as the Sun in its revolution about its own axis moves all the
planets by the emanation which it sends out from itself, so also the
mind, as the philosophers tell us, understanding itself and all that is
in itself, stimulates the use of reason, and by spreading and unfolding
its simplicity causes all things to be understood. And so closely are
the motions of the planets round the Sun and the processes of reasoning
linked and tied to each other that if the Earth, our home, did not
measure out its annual circuit in the midst of the other spheres,
changing place for place, position for position, human reasoning would
never struggle to the absolutely true distances of the planets, and to
the other things which depend on them, and would never establish
astronomy. ^[6](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote6)^

::: {align="justify"}
:::

As such, he rejected the mathematical models of planetary motion that
had been postulated by Ptolemy, Copernicus and Tycho Brahe. Though each
model was radically different, all three tried to describe the
experimentally determined non-uniform motion of the planets, by fitting
the observational statistics into mathematically defined perfect
circles. Kepler painstakingly demonstrated in the opening section of the
*New Astronomy* , that such statistical methods were incapable of
determining the truth, as all three models gave virtually the same
statistical result. To this, the protagonists of Ptolemy, Copernicus or
Brahe could raise no objection, as all three accepted the Aristotelean
belief that mathematical formalism was the only certain form of
knowledge.

But for Kepler, hypotheses concerning the true physical causes are the
only form of knowledge. Consequently, he proceeded to show that there is
an anomaly inherent in the statistical interpretations of Ptolemy,
Copernicus and Brahe which reflects the existence of a physical
principle not accounted for in any of the three systems. Like the
parallel postulate for Euclid's *Elements* , Kepler's anomaly cannot be
detected by the methods of Ptolemy, Copernicus and Brahe, and no
manipulation within the respective mathematical systems, could eliminate
it. Once identified, however, either the system must be rejected, or its
insanity must be adopted.

The underlying assumption of all three models, was the Aristotelean
insistence that motion of a material body cannot be caused by an
immaterial principle but must be caused by something within the body
itself. Consequently, the Aristoteleans saw the planetary orbit as the
artifact of the planet. Since the planet's apparently non-uniform motion
along the arc of its orbit deviated from the presumed perfection of
uniform circular motion, Ptolemy, Copernicus, and Brahe all sought some
point (equant) around which the planet would be traversing equal arcs
along its orbit. Kepler showed, exhaustively, that no such point
existed. No matter how cleverly one tried to manipulate the statistics,
with respect to the models of Ptolemy, Copernicus or Brahe, a
discrepancy remained.

Kepler concluded that this discrepancy was not a statistical aberration.
It was a matter of principle. For Kepler the planet's orbit is not the
trace of its motion. Rather, the orbit is determined by the *physical
cause* that is determining the planet's motion. That cause, Kepler
insisted, is a physical principle (gravitation) that pervades the
universe. Under this principle, there is a connection between the Sun
and the planets individually (characterized by equal areas: equal
times), and the Sun and all the planets collectively (characterized by
the harmonic relationships among the planets' minimum and maximum
speeds). The observational statistics were, for Kepler, simply the
footprints of the principle. Once the principle was identified, the
footprints could be explained.

Thus, for Kepler, the planet's non-uniform motion is guided at every
infinitesimal interval by the harmonic characteristics of the solar
system as a whole. Those harmonic principles defined the planet's orbit
as what Leibniz would later call a least-action pathway of the solar
system. In other words, the planets are not moving in one of infinitely
many possible orbits in an otherwise empty space. Rather, the planets
are moving in least-action pathways uniquely defined by the harmonic
characteristics of the solar system. From the standpoint of the planet,
Kepler emphasized, that pathway is a straight line. "Straightness" , as
Gauss would later insist, is established by physical, not { *a priori* }
mathematical considerations. The human mind judges those physical
considerations as the characteristic of change of a physical principle.
That changing characteristic, Gauss and Riemann would later express as
the notion of *physical curvature* .

::: {align="justify"}
:::

Physical Curvature From Leibniz to Gauss

Kepler's revolutionized physical astronomy demanded a complete change in
the prevailing mathematics, which is a far cry from the state of science
today. While Kepler pushed the physics forward and demanded the creation
of a new mathematics consistent with it, today's sophistical peer review
system insists on the opposite: no physical discoveries are allowed into
the temple, unless stated in terms of the already existing mathematics.

By demonstrating that physical action is truly non-uniform, Kepler had
to confront the problem of how to measure the motion of the planet as a
function of the changing effect of the principle of gravitation. That
required the development of a new mathematics that could express
position as a function of change, instead of denoting change as merely a
difference in position. Kepler pointed to the direction the new
mathematics must take, and demanded that future scientists develop it.

He specified that the entire solar system must be considered as the unit
of action, and the motion of the planet at any moment must, accordingly,
be measured as a function of the harmonic characteristics of the solar
system as a whole. Those harmonic characteristics, as reflected in the
role of the five Platonic solids and the proportions corresponding to
musical intervals among the planet's minimum and maximum speeds,
determined the number and positions of the planetary orbits. Within each
orbit, the planet's motion was measured with respect to the orbit as a
whole. Thus a mutually inverse relationship exists between the momentary
effect of gravity on the planet, and the total effect of what Gauss
would later call the gravitational potential, of the solar system as a
whole.

Leibniz generalized this conception of Kepler by the introduction of the
notion of the infinitesimal as the expression of the pervasive, *yet
ever-changing* , effect of a universal principle at every point of
physical space-time. He expressed the inverse relationship between the
infinitesimal and universal expressions of that principle as,
respectively, the differential and integral forms of the calculus. This
single *infinitesimal calculus* of Leibniz is the only true calculus.
The frauds of Newton and Cauchy are nothing more than crude sophistries
aimed at eliminating the metaphysical significance of Leibniz's physical
concept of the infinitesimal. While the infinitesimal-free formalisms of
Newton, Cauchy and their progeny might be appealing to pure
mathematicians, anyone seeking to understand anything about the physical
universe is drawn back, consciously or not, to some form of Leibniz's
conception. The relative potency, or lack thereof, of a scientist, is,
in part, reflected in the degree to which that scientist is conscious,
explicitly or implicitly, of the preeminence of Leibniz's method.

Leibniz's approach to the calculus is recounted primarily through his
own writings and those of his collaborator, Johann Bernoulli. It has
been treated, pedagogically, in previous installments of this series.
For reasons relevant to this pedagogical discussion, Leibniz's and
Bernoulli's calculus will be examined, through the example of its
application to the catenary, from the standpoint of its later
development by Gauss and Riemann.

The catenary is the crucial example of the metaphysical truthfulness of
Leibniz's calculus. All prior attempts, most notably Galileo's, to
explain the catenary's shape from mathematical considerations, failed.
It was only through the application of Leibniz's calculus to the
physical characteristics of the hanging chain, that Bernoulli and
Leibniz succeeded in revealing the metaphysical principle underlying the
catenary. ^[7](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote7)^

Both Leibniz and Bernoulli recognized that the shape assumed by a
hanging chain of uniform thickness reflects the physical effect of
applying a tension across a gravitational potential. Therefore, they
rejected any attempt to explain the catenary by assuming it was a
"curve" in an otherwise empty and flat Euclidean space. Rather, they
considered the shape of the curve as expressing the non-uniform changing
interaction of gravity and tension. This can be confirmed by the
experiments Bernoulli specifies in his text on the integral calculus,
or, those used in pedagogical presentations by members of the LYM
^[8](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote8)^ . Anyone
performing these experiments will recognize a change in the direction of
the chain from point to point, as the physically determined effect of
the changing relationship of gravity and tension. Thus the curvature of
the chain is not an arbitrary deviation from Euclidean straightness. It
is the expression of an experimentally determined physical
characteristic.

It is important to emphasize, however, that curvature, in this sense, is
not a mathematical object, but a mathematical expression of a physically
determined characteristic from which the metric relations of the
catenary are derived. These are expressed by the functional relationship
between the length of the chain within a given interval, and the
changing curvature within that same interval. In the case of the
catenary, this relationship is expressed mathematically by Bernoulli's
differential equation which expresses the length of the chain as a
function of the changing effect of gravity on tension.
^[9](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote9)^

Like a planetary orbit, the catenary exhibits a total curvature which is
expressed by the overall shape of the hanging chain
^[10](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote10)^ . Also like a
planetary orbit, the curvature is changing, differently, in every
infinitesimal part. This infinitesimal curvature is an expression of the
action of a physical principle acting tangentially on the physical chain
as if it were acting on the visible world from outside. Though outside
the visible world, it is not outside the universe. Consequently
discovering this infinitesimal expression is the means by which man can
discover from the inside of a physical process, the principles governing
it from outside the visible domain. The infinitesimal curvature can be
measured, as Leibniz proposed, by the inverse of the radius of the
osculating circle at that point. (See Figure 1.).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure001-riemann68.gif"
height="480" width="472"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure001-riemann68.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"472\" />

However, that curvature can also be measured from inside the chain, so
to speak, by the experimentally measured changing effect of the
interaction of gravity and tension on the chain, as specified by
Leibniz's and Bernoulli's differential functions.

However, deeper investigations of the physical universe requires the
ability to discover, from the inside, the effects of many principles
acting together at a single place in physical space-time. This notion of
"intrinsic" curvature becomes more clear, when understood from the
standpoint of Gauss's development of it in his famous treatise on curved
surfaces ^[11](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote11)^ .
Gauss had been deeply involved in physical investigations in geodesy,
geomagnetism and astronomy, such as his determination of the orbit of
Ceres, his determination of the shape of the Earth, and his
determination of the nature of the Earth's magnetic field. Like Kepler's
determination of the principles of planetary motion, all such
investigations demanded the determination of physical principles from
the inside. For Kepler, that meant determining the motions of the
planets from a planet (Earth) that was also moving according to the very
principles Kepler was trying to discover. But Gauss had an additional
problem. Whereas Kepler had the benefit of a large number of widely
spaced observations from which to work, Gauss was working from a small
number of relatively infinitesimal measurements. This prompted Gauss to
develop an extended form of Leibniz's calculus, in which he investigated
the relationship between global physical characteristics and their
expression in the infinitesimally small. This approach has since become
known as differential geometry.

Such physically determined surfaces, Gauss insisted, must not be
considered as curved objects otherwise embedded in a flat
three-dimensional Euclidean space, but as what Riemann would later call
doubly-extended manifolds. This concept, though new to Gauss in this
form, harkens back to a concept Kepler pronounced in the second chapter
of the *Mysterium Cosmographicum* . Referencing Cusa's emphasis on the
epistemological importance of the difference between the curved and the
straight, Kepler distinguishes between the globe, which is a sphere
embedded in three-dimensional space, and a sphere, which he considers to
be simply the surface. The former, Kepler emphasized, is a mixture of
the curved and the straight, whereas the latter is pure curvature.

Consistent with this view of Kepler, Gauss also banished the assumption
of the flatness of Euclidean geometry in his investigation of curved
surfaces, and considered the surfaces as determined purely by their
curvature. Adopting a method from astronomy and geodesy, Gauss measured
the curvature of the surface by mapping the changing directions of the
normal to the surface onto a sphere.
^[12](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote12)^ (See Figure
2.).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure002-riemann68.gif"
height="240" width="360"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure002-riemann68.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"240\" width=\"360\" />

The areas of the resulting spherical maps (called Gauss maps) are
greater when the corresponding areas of the surface are more curved and
less when the corresponding areas of the surface are less curved. Gauss
called the total area of the spherical map the total, or integral,
curvature of that region of the surface. Within that region, however,
the curvature could vary quite widely from place to place. Thus, it was
necessary for Gauss to develop a concept of local, or infinitesimal
measure of curvature at every point within that region. This he defined
as the proportion between the area of every infinitesimally small area
of the surface and the corresponding infinitesimally small area of the
Gauss map. He showed that this quantity could also be measured by the
inverse of the product of the radii of the osculating circles to the
curves of minimum and maximum curvature at that point. (See Figure 3.).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure003-riemann68.gif"
height="480" width="758"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure003-riemann68.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"758\" />

From these two measurements, integral and local curvature, Gauss could
quantify the characteristics of the surface in the large and the
changing characteristics in the small.

To measure the curvature of a surface in this way, requires viewing the
surfaces from the outside, as if they were embedded in a higher
dimensional space
^[13](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote13)^ . However,
Gauss, like Cusa, Kepler and Leibniz, realized that in real science, one
must be able to measure the physical curvature from the inside, as Gauss
had done for the determination of the orbit of Ceres, the shape of the
Earth, or the characteristics of the Earth's magnetic field. This meant
being able to determine how the surface is changing in the
infinitesimally small, from within the surface. To do this, Gauss relied
on an application of Leibniz's principle of least-action, which, in the
case of surfaces, is expressed by the behavior of that surfaces's
shortest lines, i.e. geodesics
^[14](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote14)^ . The
characteristics of these geodesics, like the catenary or a planetary
orbit, are defined by the nature of the physical principles from which
the surface is generated. Thus, their behavior expresses those physical
principles.

To do this, Gauss first showed that if, from any point on a surface, a
set of geodesic curves of equal lengths is extended, then the curve that
connects the endpoints of those geodesics will be perpendicular to all
the geodesics. (See Figure 4.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure004-riemann68.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure004-riemann68.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

More generally, he showed, that if any arbitrary curve is drawn on a
surface, and geodesic curves of equal length are drawn perpendicular to
that arbitrary curve, the curve connecting the endpoints of those
geodesics will also be perpendicular to them. (See Figure 5.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure005-riemann68.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure005-riemann68.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

Consequently, on any surface there is an intrinsic set of orthogonal
curves, at least one of which are geodesics. (See Figure 6.).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure006-riemann68.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure006-riemann68.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

In this way Gauss dispensed with all *a priori* coordinate systems such
as that of Descartes, and replaced them with a set of parameters that
expressed the physical nature of the surface itself.

From this Gauss was able to develop a means to express the length of a
geodesic curve as a function of the curvature of the surface, and vice
versa. That length could be expressed as a function of the orthogonal
curves that parametize the surface by a generalized form of the
Pythagorean theorem. (See Figure 7.).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure007-riemann68.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure007-riemann68.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

Unlike on a "flat" Euclidean surface, in which the relationship between
length of the hypotenuse and the legs of the right triangle is
independent of its position on the surface, on a curved surface that
relationship changes depending on its position. That change is a
function of the changing curvature of the surface. Consequently, Gauss's
generalized Pythagorean function, called Gauss's metric function,
expresses how this relationship *changes* from place to place on the
surface, depending on the *changing* curvature. (See Figure 8.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure008-riemann68.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure008-riemann68.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

This established a determinable functional relationship between length
(metric) and curvature.

From a physical standpoint, this meant that he could measure the
changing curvature of the surface from the physically measured changes
in the lengths of geodesics with respect to the physical parameters of
the surface. Gauss applied this method in his famous measurement of the
longitude line from Goettingen to Altona, from which, on the basis of a
16″ of an arc discrepancy, he developed a new conception of the entire
shape of the Earth!

However, the expression of this relationship between length and
curvature was mathematically quite complicated. Consequently, Gauss also
found a much simpler expression of the relationship between the behavior
of the geodesic and the curvature. He recognized that in the real,
*anti* -Euclidean world, there is no such thing as similar triangles. On
any curved surface, the sum of the angles of a triangle formed by
shortest lines is always greater or less than 180 degrees, depending on
whether the surface on which that triangle exists is positively or
negatively curved.
^[15](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote15)^ This
difference, which Gauss called the angular excess, or defect, is a
function of the area of the triangle. On a positively curved surface,
the greater the area of the triangle, the greater the angular excess, up
to a maximum. On a negatively curved surface, the smaller the area of
the triangle, the greater the angular defect, down to a minimum of zero.
The specific proportion between the angular excess and defect and the
area is a function of the curvature. On a more (e.g, positively) curved
portion of a surface, a triangle encompassing a small area will have a
larger angular excess, than a triangle encompassing a similar sized area
on a less curved portion. Thus, the curvature of a portion of the
surface is expressed by the changing relationship between the area of a
geodesic triangle and the angular excess or defect.

In this way, Gauss showed that the curvature of a surface could be
measured by the proportion of the spherical excess (or defect) to the
area of the geodesic triangle. This enabled the scientist to determine
the characteristic curvature of the surface from on the surface without
regard to the arbitrary fiction of Euclidean space, or some arbitrary
fixed Cartesian, or other, coordinate system.

Though the formulas expressing these relationships could become very
complicated, Gauss also developed the means to carry out their
calculation, making his concepts directly applicable to the physical
problems he was investigating.

In this way, Gauss took the first steps to liberate mankind from the
lingering oppression of Euclidean geometry. His protege, Bernhard
Riemann, would push it further.

::: {align="justify"}
:::

A Brief Interlude on Time

::: {align="justify"}
:::

Before turning directly to Riemann's contribution, it is necessary to
include a brief note on the principle of least-action, both for the sake
of the scientific completeness of the argument presented, and to wrench
the reader away from any lingering dependence on *a priori* notions of
space and time. Perhaps even more stubborn than the adherence to the
spatial relations of Euclidean geometry, is the psychological adherence
to a belief in the existence of some absolute measure of time. As Plato
emphasized in the Timaeus, later echoed, most notably by Philo,
Augustine and Cusa, time is not an absolute quantity measured by some
great grandfather clock in the sky. Time is a relation of change. As
Plato stated it, " *time is the moving image of eternity* " *.*

This is the way Kepler understood time. Instead of measuring the
non-uniform motion of the planet by a measure of uniform absolute time
(mean Sun) Kepler measured time by the planet's motion itself (true
Sun.) He took as the unit of time the unique interval in which the
planet's motion is the same at beginning and end: the entire orbit.
Equal portions of time were measured by those units with equal amounts
of motion, i.e. equal orbital areas. These orbital areas are relative to
the orbit, not absolute. Thus the planet's motion defines what is time.
Without the motion, there is no time.

A similar issue is raised by Fermat's subsequent discovery that light
travels the path of least-time.
^[16](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote16)^ Under simple
reflection, the path of light is the shortest distance. Yet under
refraction, Fermat showed, the path of light is the path of least time.
The difference between the two physical actions is, that under
reflection there is no change in medium, whereas under refraction, there
is. The change in medium produces a change in the physical
characteristics of the manifold of action. That physical change defines
a new behavior for the shortest path, i.e. the geodesic. Under
reflection, that geodesic is the path of least-distance. Under
refraction it is least-time. The nature of light doesn't change. It
always seeks the shortest path. But when the characteristics of the
manifold in which that light is acting changes the shortest path changes
from least-distance to least-time.

Thus again, time is not an absolute quantity, but a characteristic of
change of physical action--a change in the characteristics of physical
space-time.

In the real world there is no absolute time. There is, as Heraclitus,
Plato and Cusa emphasized, *change* , of which time is a relative
measure. The most efficient means to wrest oneself from the crippling
belief of absolute time is to recognize the obvious: *the only unit of
absolute time is eternity.* *All smaller actions are just parts of
eternity whose measure is relative to the manifold in which it occurs* .

::: {align="justify"}
:::

Riemannian Manifolds and Tensors

::: {align="justify"}
:::

Riemann began his June 10, 1854 habilitation dissertation in the
tradition of Hans Christaan Anderson's little boy in the story about the
Emperor with no clothes. He declared that though the assumptions of
Euclidean geometry have been accepted for more than two thousand years,
no one had bothered to consider whether they are true. Since all
physical action is experimentally determined to be *anti* -Euclidean,
Riemann insisted that the *a priori assumptions* of Euclidean geometry
must be abolished and banned from future consideration in science.

Riemann replaced the arbitrary assumption of an absolute Euclidean
space, with the idea of a physical manifold of action whose
"dimensions", like the parameters of Gauss's surfaces, denote the
physical principles acting in that manifold. The number of these
dimensions is not fixed *a priori,* as are the three linear dimensions
of Euclidean geometry, but are determined by the number of physical
principles that must be considered to fully express the physical action
of the manifold.

Thus, Riemann extended Gauss's notion of a surface to an *n-tply
extended manifold* , of which Gauss's surfaces represent a special case
of a doubly-extended manifold. For example, the path of light under
reflection can be seen as a geodesic in a simply-extended manifold
because the position of the light can be determined completely from one
physical parameter: the angle of incidence. On the other hand, the path
of light under refraction is a geodesic in a doubly-extended manifold
because the presence of the additional principle requires the
determination of position with respect to two parameters: the angle of
incidence and the index of refraction. Again, it is not the light which
changes from reflection to refraction, but the manifold in which it is
acting. That change in the physical principles acting on the manifold
produces a corresponding change in the characteristic of the geodesic,
from the shortest path to the path of quickest time.

In a fragmentary note written between 1852 and 1853, prior to the
delivery of his habilitation dissertation, Riemann gave an example of
his concept of a manifold determined by *physical* principles, not *a
priori* geometrical dimensions.

The concept of a manifold of multiple dimensions subsists independently
of our intuitions of space. Space, plane and line are only the most
intuitive examples of a manifold of three, two or one dimensions. Yet
without having the most minimal intuition we would be able to develop an
entire Geometry. I want to explain this with an example:

Suppose that I wanted to make an experiment or observation and it were
only important to me to establish one numerical value, say, the degree
of heat. In this case, all possible results could be represented by a
continuous series of numerical values from positive infinity to negative
infinity. But suppose that I wanted to determine two numerical values,
say, I wanted to make a determination of temperature and a determination
of weight, then the results would have to be conditioned by two
magnitudes x and y. Here I would only obtain the totality of cases if I
were to give x and y all values between negative infinity and positive
infinity, combining each value of x with each value of y. I will obtain
a unique case so long as x taken also with y has a determined value.

Now I can extract out the totality of cases, a complex of cases, I can,
for example establish the equation ax + by + c = 0 and now put all those
cases together where x and y satisfy this equation: I were able to call
this complex of cases a {straight line}. From this definition of a
straight line I would be able to derive all those theorems about
straight lines that occur in geometry. It is clear that one could
proceed in this way without relying on the most minimal intuitions about
space.

By this manner of treatment of geometry, or the theory of manifolds of
three dimensions, all the axioms which are taken in the usual manner of
treating spacial intuitions, as for example, that through any two points
only one straight line is possible, the first axiom of Euclid,
disappear, and only those which are valid for magnitudes in general, for
example, that the order of summands is arbitrary, remain.

One now finds easily, how, in the same way, one can obtain a manifold of
two dimensions, independent of the existence of a plane, also how one
can reach a magnitude of arbitrarily many dimensions. We only must make
observations which (... concern the determination of many numerical
magnitudes. sentence completed by Weber.)

But it is also interesting to understand the possibility that this
treatment of geometry, would, nevertheless, be extremely unfruitful,
since we would not find any new theorems and that what is achieved
easily and simply through the representation of space is only turned
into something complex and difficult. One has to, in general, opt to
take the opposite way and where, one runs into the geometry of manifolds
of more dimensions, as in the study of definite integrals in the theory
of imaginary magnitudes, one uses the intuitions of space as an aid. It
is good to know, how, through this, one achieves a true overview about
the subject, and only through this way can the essential points be
directly brought forward.

::: {align="justify"}
:::

Thus, with Euclidean *a priori* dimensions replaced by physical
principles whose number and characteristics reflect the physical
characteristics of a manifold of physical action, it fell to Riemann to
outline how to express the functional relationship among these
principles, without resort to any *a priori* assumptions. The
preliminary direction for this was given in his habilitation
dissertation through the development of his concept of a "
*multiply-extended magnitude* ".

Action in an *n-tply* extended physical manifold, Riemann insisted, must
be expressed by the appropriate *n-tply extended magnitude* . Such
magnitudes *do not* express a fixed set of relationships as in Euclidean
geometry. Rather, Riemann's *n-tply* extended magnitudes express the
*dynamic* relationships among the principles that determine the physical
action in the manifold.

An elementary example is the ancient Pythagorean investigation of the
line, square and cube. Think of a line, square and cube whose segment,
side and edge, respectively, are all the same length. Are these lengths
all the same magnitude? From the standpoint of Euclidean geometry, or
formal algebra, the answer would be yes. But from the standpoint of the
physical geometry of the Pythagoreans, Gauss and Riemann, the answer is,
absolutely not. The only magnitude appropriate to the square is one
which expresses the dynamic relationship between length and area, which
the Pythagoreans demonstrated is incommensurable with a linear
magnitude. Similarly, the only magnitude appropriate to the cube is one
that expresses the dynamic relationship between length, area and volume.
Under this cubic magnitude, all subsumed relationships are redefined.
For example, the relationship between length and area in a cubic
magnitude is different from the relationship of length and area in the
square one. As the constructions of Plato and Archytas demonstrate, each
object is generated by a distinct principle. Each is the product of a
different physical manifold, with a specific number of principles and a
distinct characteristic curvature
^[17](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote17)^ .

Riemann freed science from the crippling effects of trying to
investigate the physical universe using the arbitrary measuring rods and
clocks of absolute Euclidean space and time. Once freed, the physical
universe itself designates the appropriate quantities by which it should
be measured. Just as the Pythagoreans' demonstration of the difference
between a line, square, and cube, Cusa's insistence that the curved can
never be measured by the straight, or Kepler's understanding that the
planet's motion defined the meaning of time, Riemann's concept of
*physically determined n-tply extended manifolds* defined a new form of
magnitude. One form of such *n-tply* extended magnitudes, relevant to
the study of physical economy, is the modern notion of a *tensor* .

*A tensor is a type of quantity in which the dynamically connected
relations, within and among, n-tply extended manifolds, are expressed as
a unified magnitude* .

While there are formal mathematical expressions of a tensor, such as
that presented in Eisenhart's text, and while these formulas are, at
times, useful, such expressions in formulas do not truly embody
Riemann's idea. The idea must be gained first, before the formulas. As
Riemann indicated in the fragmentary note above, this is best achieved
through the pedagogical use of geometrical examples. In this respect,
Riemann is echoing Plato, Cusa and Gauss who all emphasized the
metaphorical employment of geometry for the communication of concepts
that lay outside the domain of sense perception. In such cases, all
warned, that though the geometrical examples are indispensable for our
understanding, they are a guide to, not a substitute for, the conception
from which they are generated. In his habilitation dissertation Riemann
issued a similar admonition:

These relations of measure can be investigated only in abstract notions
of magnitude and can be exhibited connectedly only in formulae; upon
certain assumptions, however, one is able to resolve them into relations
which are separately capable of being represented geometrically, and by
this means it becomes possible to express geometrically the results of
the calculation. Therefore if one is to reach solid ground, an abstract
investigation in formulae is indeed unavoidable, but its results will
allow an exhibition in the clothing of geometry. For both parts the
foundations are contained in the celebrated treatise of Privy Councillor
Gauss upon curved surfaces.

::: {align="justify"}
:::

The modern notion of a tensor arises directly from Riemann's preliminary
idea of the nature of an *n-tply* extended magnitude. In developing this
idea, Riemann extended Gauss's notions of curvature and metric relations
from his doubly-extended surfaces to Riemann's *n-tply* extended
manifolds. From this standpoint, curvature expresses the dynamic
interacting relationship of the *n* physical principles acting in the
manifold, while the metric expresses the behavior of the least-action
pathways, i.e. geodesics, expressed in the manifold. To grasp these
points, one must bear Riemann's admonition in mind. Use the example of
Gauss's concepts of curvature and metric as a special case, and imagine
the extension of these concepts into manifolds that cannot be directly
visualized. What is lost by not being able to visualize such manifolds
from the outside, is gained by being compelled to discover their nature
from the inside. Begin by extending the idea of a curved surface to a
concept of curvature for a triply-extended magnitude--a, so-to-speak,
curved volume. To do this one must be ruthless in rejecting the *a
priori* notions of Euclidean space. Such a curved volume is not a big
square box in which curved action occurs, but a physical manifold
defined by the action of three physical principles, or one principle
acting in three directions, as for example in the case of the magnetic
field of the earth. If one now imagines moving around in such a
manifold, (such as the motion of a compass needle as it moves through
the earth's magnetic field), one would experience a changing effect of
the physical principles as a distinct change in curvature in each of (in
this example) three directions. However the ability to establish any
visual representation (even one as inadequate as the one just given), of
this same characteristic in a manifold greater than three, is futile.
Nevertheless, a precise concept of such multiply-extended curvature can
be formed in the mind.

Riemann generalized this concept showing that at any point in an
*n-tply* extended manifold there are *n(n-1)/2* distinct surface
directions intersecting, each with its own unique curvature, which
together determine the curvature of the manifold acting on that point
^[18](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote18)^ These
curvatures, all of which can be completely different, can be measured,
as Gauss did, as the proportion between a geodesic triangle's angular
excess, or defect and the area of that triangle encompasses.
^[19](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote19)^ Riemann
defined the measure of curvature at each point of the manifold as the
magnitude that expresses the *n(n-1)/2* distinct surface curvatures at
that point--a magnitude that is now called the *Riemann curvature
tensor* .

*This tensor is not a single number. It is a magnitude that expresses
how the n(n-1)/2 distinct curvatures are changing at each point, and,
how this change changes, from place to place in the manifold* . Each
distinct curvature measures the change within one of the intersecting
surfaces. But, just as the cubic magnitude defines the relationship
between length and area differently than the square magnitude, Riemann's
curvature tensor defines each lower component curvature from the
standpoint of the dynamics of the manifold as a whole.

In the case of Gauss's doubly-extended manifolds *n(n-1)/2* equals one.
Consequently, the curvature tensor has one component--Gauss's measure of
curvature as defined above.
^[20](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote20)^ For a
triply-extended manifold, (a curved "volume"), *n(n-1)/2* equals three.
Thus, to define the measure of curvature at a point of a triply-extended
manifold requires a tensor, that express the functional relationship
among three component functions, each of which expresses the changing
curvature of a surface. The curvature tensor, therefore, expresses the
changing relationship among these three measures of curvature, *as a
single, subsuming, type of function* . Again, the three-foldedenss of
this magnitude cannot be expressed simply by one number, or simply by
three individual measures of curvature. Rather, one *n-tply* extended
magnitude, or tensor, is required.

For a quadruply extended manifold, six surface directions will intersect
at each point, establishing a Riemann curvature tensor expressing a
functional relationship among these six distinct measures of curvature.

Though such a manifold cannot be directly visualized, with Riemann's
approach, its measure of curvature can be clearly defined.

In addition to this notion of curvature of an *n-tply* extended
manifold, Riemann defined the concept of an *n-tply* extended metric. To
do this he extended Gauss's generalization of the Pythagorean metric of
the geodesic from doubly-extended to *n-tply* extended manifolds. Recall
that Gauss showed that for a doubly-extended manifold the length of the
geodesics are expressed by three functions of the two parameters that
define the surface.
^[21](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote21)^ These three
functions express the relationship between the length of a geodesic and
the changing curvature of the surface.

For a triply-extended manifold, one can imagine, that instead of the
geodesic changing with respect to two parameters (surface differential),
it is changing with respect to three, which form, so to speak, a volume
differential. As this volume differential moves around the manifold, the
length of the geodesic it contains changes. To express the relationship
between the length of the geodesic and the three parameters that define
the volume differential requires a tensor that expresses a function
among six functions.

Again, as inadequate as this visualization is for a triply-extended
manifold, even such an indirect visualization is impossible for
manifolds whose extension is greater than three. Nevertheless, Riemann
developed a precise concept of such an *n-tply* extended metric. He
showed that in an *n-tply* extended manifold there are, in principle,
*n(n+1)/2* functions of the manifold's *n* physical parameters,
necessary to define the metric.
^[22](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote22)^ These
*n(n+1)/2* functions have since become known as the *Riemann metric
tensor* . They express the changing effect of the curvature of the
manifold on the measurements of the lengths of the geodesic lines.

The above examples, though somewhat abstract, nevertheless provide a
basis for forming a pedagogical (as opposed to merely formal) conception
of the Riemann curvature and metric tensors. *Broadly defined, the
notion of a Riemannian tensor expresses a definite set of functional
relationships among the n physical principles acting together to produce
the total effect in an n-tply extended manifold of physical action* .

Further, Riemann's extension of Gauss's notions of curvature to *n-tply*
extended manifolds provides a means to determine the physical
characteristics of such a manifold from the infinitesimal expressions of
those characteristics, i.e. from inside the manifold.

Riemann not only developed the form of the relevant tensors, he also
provided an experimental example and elaborated a means for their
calculation. In an 1861 paper submitted to the Paris Academy of Science
in response to a prize question concerning determining the flow of heat
in a homogenous solid body as a function of time and two other
variables, Riemann developed a physical example of the curvature of an
*n-tply* extended manifold. In that paper Riemann wrote:

The expression (insert expression for the generalized Pythagorean) can
be regarded as a linear element in a general *n* -fold extended space
lying outside our intuition. If in this space we draw all possible
shortest lines from the point (s ~1~ ,s ~2~ ,...s ~n~ ) whose initial
directions are characterized by the relations: ? *d* s ~1~ +??s ~1~ ; ?
*d* s ~2~ +??s ~2~ ;...; ? *d* s ~n~ +??s ~n~ (? and ? being arbitrary
quantities), these lines form a certain surface that can be thought of
as situated in the usual space of our intuition. In that case the
expression will be a measure of the curvature of the surface at the
point (s ~1~ ,s ~2~ ,...s ~n~ ).
^[23](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote23)^

The spinning top, discussed in the last installment of this series,
provides another pedagogical example of a manifold of physical action in
which tensors are required to express the physical action.
^[24](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote24)^ As discussed
previously, the top's motion is the result of its changing relationship
to the gravitational potential and the angular momentum generated by the
top's spinning. The effect of each is expressed by a vector comprising
three component functions. Thus, to express the top's motion requires a
tensor expressing the changing relationship of the two vectors. This
tensor expresses the physical manifold in which the top is spinning,
which, as Felix Klein himself was forced to admit, expresses an
anti-Euclidean manifold. But, unlike Klein, who pompously insisted that
this anti-Euclidean manifold is purely mathematical and has no
metaphysical significance, this anti-Euclidean manifold is the only one
with both physical and metaphysical reality.

One of the more famous examples of an application of Riemannian-type
tensors to physics is Albert. Einstein's use of them in his general
theory of relativity in which he expressed the gravitational
relationships of physical space-time by a complex of tensors.

These cited examples, however, only scratch the surface. They are
examples of the investigations of physical manifolds in which the
principles acting are limited to those associated with the abiotic
domain. In the *n-tply* extended manifolds studied in the science of
physical economy, physical principles of the biotic and cognitive
domains are also acting. Further, the relationships between these
principles *are dynamically anti-entropic* . *Thus an extension of
Riemannian-type tensors is required to express the dynamic relationship
among manifolds of increasing degrees of extension* . Before outlining
those requirements, however, it is necessary to consider the other side
of the matter investigated by Riemann.

::: {align="justify"}
:::

The Physical Topology of Self-Bounded Manifolds

::: {align="justify"}
:::

In the above discussion of the generalized form of differential
geometry, the notion of physical curvature was extended into manifolds
defined by *n* physical principles and investigated as that
characteristic is expressed in the infinitesimally small. This type of
investigation is crucial for progress in science, because it is in the
infinitesimal regions that the characteristics of curvature and metric
relations are measured, and it is from the anomalies discovered by these
measurements that the existence and nature of new physical principles
are discovered. As Riemann emphasized in his habilitation dissertation,
"Knowledge of the causal connection of phenomena is based essentially
upon the precision with which we follow them down into the infinitely
small."

However, these characteristics in the small, Riemann understood, are not
determined completely by the action in the local regions of a physical
manifold. Just as singular events that occurred thousands of years ago,
or an intention to produce a result two generations hence, determine the
immediate actions in society today, the local characteristics of a
physical manifold reflect the global nature of the manifold. Riemann
showed that these global characteristics are defined by such features as
the number of singularities and the conditions at the boundary of
action. In fact, though the local measures of curvature and metric
relations can vary quite widely within a manifold, there are certain
global characteristics which have a determining effect on their physical
significance. Riemann referred to the investigation of these global
characteristics as belonging to the domain of "analysis situs". Later,
another of Gauss's students, Johann Listing, adopted the term "topology"
(from the Greek word, "topos" meaning position) for this study. As will
become more apparent below, it is only by taking into account the
relationship between the topological and local characteristics that it
is possible to know anything fundamental about the physical process
under investigation.

In his habilitation dissertation and the fragment cited above, Riemann
indicated that the context for an investigation into this relationship
between local and topological characteristics lay in his study of
complex functions, in which he expressed the notion of a self-bounded,
multiply-connected manifold in the form of what have since become known
as Riemann surfaces. Riemann developed the initial work in this area,
under the direction of Gauss, in his 1851 doctoral dissertation. Then,
subsequent to his habilitation dissertation, Riemann deepened his
investigations in his famous studies of Abelian functions, minimal
surfaces, and hypergeometries
^[25](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote25)^ .

Though Riemann's discovery in this area is a unique advance in
knowledge, its roots reach back to Plato and the Pythagoreans, who
insisted that all investigation of the universe must begin with a
conception of the nature of the universe as a whole. In the *Timaeus* ,
Plato expressed this nature as the monotheistic concept that the
universe is a single creation of a single creator. Plato states that the
geometrical expression of such a self-bounded universe would take a
spherical form:

Now for that living creature which is designed to embrace within itself
all living creatures the fitting shape will be that which comprises
within itself all the shapes there are; wherefore He wrought it into a
round, in the shape of a sphere, equidistant in all directions from the
center to extremities, which of all shapes is the most perfect and the
most self-similar, since He deemed that the similar is infinitely fairer
than the dissimilar. And on the outside round about, it was all made
smooth with great exactness, and that for many reasons.

::: {align="justify"}
:::

Riemann reaffirmed this notion of a finite, self-bounded universe in his
habilitation dissertation, except from the higher standpoint of his
notion of a multiply-extended manifold:

The unlimitedness of space has therefore a greater certainty,
empirically, than any experience of the external. From this, however,
follows in no wise its infiniteness, but on the contrary space would
necessarily be finite, if one assumes that bodies are independent of
situation and so ascribes to space a constant measure of curvature,
provided this measure of curvature had any positive value however small.
If one were to prolong the elements of direction, that lie in any
element of surface, into shortest lines (geodetics), one would obtain an
unlimited surface with constant positive measure of curvature,
consequently a surface which would take on, in a triply extended
manifold, the form of a spherical surface, and would therefore be
finite.

::: {align="justify"}
:::

Plato emphasized that the topological characteristic of a self-bounded
universe also determines a characteristic which modern science would
identify as "quantization". This is expressed, from Plato's perspective,
by the uniqueness of the five regular Platonic and semi-regular
Archimedean solids as the unique divisions of the spherical surface.
^[26](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote26)^ Further
progress was made in this area by the investigations of Luca Pacioli and
Leonardo da Vinci, particularly the latter's emphasis on the
significance into these matters for the distinction between the abiotic
and biotic domains. Significant new advances to this understanding were
added by Kepler's discovery of a new form of regular solid, the
so-called Kepler-Poinsot stellated solids, and Napier's contemporaneous
discovery of the pentagramma mirificum. With the crystallographic
studies reported in his snowflake paper, Kepler extended this notion
into the domain of triply-extended manifolds, as later indicated by
Riemann in the above cited section of his habilitation dissertation.

But from Archytas's construction for the doubling of the cube, to
Kepler's determination of the elliptical nature of the planetary orbits,
the experimental evidence indicated that physical action was bounded by
a higher form of action than that expressed by these concepts of
spherical action.

The solution to this paradox began to come more fully to light with such
discoveries as Gauss's renewed look at the regular and semi-regular
solids from the standpoint of the general principles of curvature,
reviewed above, his discovery of the connection of Napier's pentagramma
mirificum to elliptical functions, his work on the significance of the
arithmetic-geometric mean, and the implications of his insights into the
division of the circle, the ellipse and biquadratic residues.

These discoveries presaged Riemann's insight into the deeper nature of
topological effects, which he developed in his study of minimal
surfaces, Abelian and hypergeometric functions
^[27](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote27)^ . In these
studies, Riemann developed a concept of a higher notion of
self-boundedness, which was expressed by the succession of relatively
self-bounded manifolds associated with the Riemann surfaces generated
with respect to the extended class of transcendental functions known as
Abelian functions. Riemann showed that each species of transcendental is
associated with an increasing density of singularities, which is
expressed in the corresponding Riemann surface by a change in their
topological characteristics. (See Figure 10.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure010-riemann68.gif"
height="244" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure010-riemann68.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"244\" width=\"720\" />

It is this Riemannian notion of self-boundedness which is the relevant
approach to modern physical science.

The essential characteristic of these Riemann surfaces, Riemann
insisted, is their expression of what he called, "Dirichlet's
Principle", ^[28](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote28)^ a
physical principle he adopted from his teacher, Lejeune Dirichlet, whose
lectures on Gauss's theory of potential, Riemann had attended at the
University of Berlin. In these studies, Gauss and Dirichlet had
generalized Leibniz's initial work on dynamics, through the study of
gravity, magnetism and electricity. Like Leibniz, Gauss and Dirichlet
emphasized that the specific characteristics of a physical action are
the effect of the least-action properties, "potential", of the physical
principles governing that action. Gauss defined as the "potential
function" , the function that expresses the characteristic curvature
expressed by these least-action properties. In other words, physical
principles such as gravity, magnetism and electricity establish an
*anti* -Euclidean manifold, whose nature can be expressed by the general
principles of curvature that Gauss had developed. In the lectures which
Riemann attended, Dirichlet emphasized that this potential function was
expressed by a set of harmonic functions, i.e. functions whose rate of
change of curvature is equal in magnitude and perpendicular in
direction, and that such harmonic functions necessarily expressed the
least-action properties of the potential.

Further, Gauss and Dirichlet also recognized that the specific
characteristics of a potential function were determined by the
conditions at the boundary of action. For example, the surface of a
magnet or of the Earth, in the case of magnetism or gravity, or the
conditions at the boundary of a heat conducting body, as in the example
developed by Riemann cited above. From this, Dirichlet showed that the
characteristics of the potential function throughout the manifold could
be specified by the boundary conditions, and changed when those
conditions changed. (See Figure 11.).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure011-riemann68.gif"
height="288" width="288"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure011-riemann68.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"288\" width=\"288\" />

Riemann went still further. He recognized that Dirichlet's principle
expresses a unique characteristic of functions of a complex variable.
When such functions are represented by Riemann's surfaces, Dirichlet's
principle is extended to include physical manifolds with an increasing
density of singularities, as Riemann showed in his work on Abelian and
hypergeometric functions.

This meant that Riemann could demonstrate the relationship between the
characteristics of curvature in the infinitesimally small, and the
global characteristics of the manifold, specifically the number,
characteristics and density of singularities.

This can be pedagogically illustrated by example. First, take the
sphere, which is the form of the Riemann surface for the simple
transcendental functions associated with the circular, hyperbolic and
exponential functions. Each such function defines a different set of
Gaussian parameters from which the metric relationships are determined.
However, the metric relations hold only for local situations. For
example, there is only one geodesic between any two points only if those
points are close to each other. But if they are the poles, there is an
infinite number of geodesics that connect them. Riemann showed that on a
spherical surface there are inherently always two such poles. Such
surfaces Riemann defined as "simply-connected". Further, Riemann showed
that this is a characteristic of any simply connected surface, and since
any simply connected surface can be mapped onto the sphere without
changing its harmonic relationships (i.e., conformally), this
characteristic is "topological", i.e., independent of the particular
metric relations. Nevertheless, it determines the conditions in which
those metric relations exist.

Now look at the case of the torus, which is the surface associated with
the elliptical transcendentals. Here an entirely different situation
occurs. As Gauss and Riemann showed, this species of transcendental
expresses a higher power of physical action than the simple
transcendentals. This higher power is expressed by the increasing
density of singularities, which is expressed in the Riemann surface by a
change in the topological characteristics of the manifold. Riemann
denoted surfaces such as the torus as "doubly-connected". However,
unlike the case of simply-connected manifolds, doubly connected
manifolds cannot, in general, be conformally mapped to each other. This
means that the manifold of doubly-connected manifolds has, in a sense, a
greater degree of "quantization", as this concept was explored by Gauss
in his investigation of the arithmetic-geometric mean
^[29](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote29)^ . But, as
will become clear below, this change in topology is also associated with
a fundamental change in the global nature of the curvature of the
manifold.

This change becomes clear when Gauss's concept of curvature is combined
with the notion of the Riemann surfaces, as Riemann did in his study of
minimal surfaces. Minimal surfaces, such as the catenoid, express a
physical characteristic of least action. This characteristic is
expressed by the fact that the mean curvature of a minimal surface is
everywhere constant. Riemann showed that the Gauss maps of minimal
surfaces are conformal to the original surface. (See Figure 12.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure12a-riemann68.gif"
height="240" width="360"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure12a-riemann68.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"240\" width=\"360\" />

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure12b-riemann68.gif"
height="240" width="360"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure12b-riemann68.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"240\" width=\"360\" />

Since his surfaces generated from complex functions, reflecting the
harmonic characteristics of Gauss and Dirichlet's functions of physical
potential, also have this characteristic they imply a corresponding
Gauss map.

But, an even deeper insight comes to light when we look further into the
topological connection between the Riemann surfaces and Gauss maps.
Begin this investigation with a look at the curvature of
simply-connected surfaces. As discussed above, the parts of these
surfaces that are more curved will generate large areas on the Gauss
map, and the parts that are less curved will generate small areas on the
Gauss map. (See Figure 13.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure013-riemann68.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure013-riemann68.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

But though the curvature can vary widely from place to place on the
surface, the total curvature of the surface, that is, the Gauss map of
the entire surface, will be the same for every simply-connected surface!

This would appear to lead to a devastating conclusion if we held to the
idea that the form of the universe was simply spherical. For in such a
case, the total curvature of the universe would be fixed. Thus, the
local curvature could change, but no such changes could affect the
overall curvature of the universe itself. This idea corresponds to the
Aristotelean dogma that, though change can occur in the small, in the
overall scheme of the universe, no fundamental change is possible. This
view, of course, is contradicted by the experimental evidence of
physical science and the history of man, whose discoveries and
applications of universal principles have brought about changes that can
only be expressed as a change in the total curvature of the universe.

But, fortunately, as Riemann showed, our minds are not limited to
simply-connected manifolds. On the basis of his discoveries, we can form
a concept more appropriate to the *anti-entropic* nature of the real
universe: *a succession of manifolds of increasing connectivity
associated with an increasing change in the total curvature of the
manifold* .

Now look at the Gauss map for the torus, as an example of a
doubly-extended manifold. The outside of the torus is positively curved
and the inside negatively curved. The circles that form the boundary of
the two regions have zero curvature. Thus, the curvature of the torus is
more complex than a simply-connected surface. This becomes clear from
the Gauss maps. The outside of the torus maps to an entire sphere, and
the inside also maps to an entire sphere, except in the opposite
direction. (See Figure 14.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure014a-riemann68.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure014a-riemann68.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure014b-riemann68.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure014b-riemann68.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

The boundary circles map to the poles. Thus, the Gauss map of the torus
is itself a Riemann surface with a total curvature of zero!

This provides us with a better conception of zero curvature than the
idea of flatness. Instead of thinking of a measurement of zero curvature
as Euclidean flatness, we can think of zero curvature as the total
effect of a manifold with equal amounts of positive and negative
curvature. The local curvature in such a manifold can be either negative
or positive, as is also possible for a simply-connected surface. But the
significance of the local curvature in each manifold is entirely
different.

From this comparison of the simply connected surface with a total
curvature equal to one spherical surface, and the torus with a total
curvature of zero, it might appear that we are not heading in the
direction of a concept of a universe with a possibility of an ever
changing curvature. But this appearance is remedied when we look at the
Gauss maps for a triply-connected manifold, associated with the next
higher species of transcendental, the hyper-elliptical. (See Figure 15.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure015-riemann68.gif"
height="520" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure015-riemann68.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"520\" width=\"720\" />

Such a manifold has one positively curved region and two negatively
curved ones. Thus, the Gauss map will be one positive spherical surface
and two negative ones, for a net total curvature of -1 spherical
surface.

If we now think of the entire manifold of Riemann's surfaces, we see a
manifold of manifolds of increasing density of singularities, and with a
*discontinuously* increasingly *negative* total curvature. Such
discontinuities between changes in total curvature also corresponds to a
change resulting from the introduction of an entirely new principle
acting on the manifold. This change produces a corresponding change in
the quantization of the manifold. This idea, combined with Riemann's
idea of *n-tply* extended magnitudes, *tensors* , is the basic concept
necessary to approach an investigation of the physical economy.

That, however, requires the development of a still higher form of
tensor.

::: {align="justify"}
:::

Riemannian Tensors in Economics--A Preliminary Approach

::: {align="justify"}
:::

With everything stated above in mind, a sketch of a preliminary approach
to the construction of Riemannian-type tensor-like magnitudes
appropriate to expressing physical economic processes can be attempted.
The principles on which this is based have been developed thoroughly by
LaRouche in many locations, most relevantly, his recent *Dynamics &
Economy* .

Such multiply-extended magnitudes must express the interaction of
abiotic, biotic and cognitive principles, as a dynamic of the social
interaction among humans, that is itself acting on the abiotic, biotic
and cognitive domains. This dynamic cannot be treated as a fixed, even
non-linear, interaction, but as a dynamic that itself is changing due to
the willful action of the creative powers of man. Thus, the
physical-economic manifold of action must be considered as *the manifold
of the increasing potential to produce ideas* .

As such, no form of an array or matrix of data and functions (even
algebraically non-linear ones), such as are indicated by the formal
mathematical treatment of tensors, is adequate. Rather, these
physical-economic tensor-like quantities are better expressed by the
form of animations specified by LaRouche.

For example, the principle of universal gravitation cannot be expressed
as an array of mathematical relations, either in the form modern science
textbooks display as "Kepler's laws", or, more falsely, as a consequence
of the degenerate form of Newton's inverse square formulation. Any
truthful expression of the principle of universal gravitation must
express that principle as a discovery acting to change the dynamic of
the universe. What must be taken into account is that gravitation was
acting as a physical principle in and on the universe prior to Kepler's
discovery and elaboration of that principle. *But with Kepler's
discovery and the propagation of that discovery through succeeding
generations, the power of the principle of gravitation changed, because
it could now act on the universe from the higher-powered domain of human
cognitive interaction, which, retrospectively, redefined the
undiscovered principle of universal gravitation as containing the
unrealized potential to produce the intended effect of its discovery.*

This type of change should be expressed in the new tensor-like
magnitudes as a *discontinuous* change in the total characteristic
curvature of the manifold of physical economy, of the type associated
with Riemann's treatment of such a change in power with respect to the
Abelian transcendentals.

This change in total curvature is associated with a change in the
infinitesimal, or local curvature of the manifold of physical economic
processes. To establish a notion of local curvature requires a complete
and total rejection of any notions of Euclidean-type absolute time.
Events that are widely separated by one measure of time, are,
nevertheless, simultaneous, with respect to another. For example, the
conflict in ancient Athens between Socrates and the Sophists is
separated from events today by more than two thousand revolutions of the
earth around the Sun. Nevertheless, the effects of these events are
acting in the universe today as efficiently as then. Similarly, intended
events that are yet to occur, such as the successful establishment of
human habitation of Mars, have an immediate effect on the conduct of
human activity on Earth today. Consequently, a conception of physical
economic local curvature must consider actions as simultaneously, *both*
widely separated and virtually instantaneous.
^[30](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part68.html#Footnote30)^

The above indicated role of human cognition in the development of the
universe is expressed by man's increasing power in and over the abiotic,
biotic, and cognitive domains through progress in science and art. Thus,
the development of the universe as a whole is the effect of the
increasing potential of the creative powers of man. Consequently,
physical economic progress can be expressed by that increasing potential
to generate creative ideas.

However, such ideas are not generated in the universe as a whole, but by
the dyanamic relationship of the universe to the sovereign, *willful* ,
creative powers of the individual human mind. This "local action"
affects, and is affected by, the total creative potential of mankind,
and potentially, the universe as a whole. From the standpoint of the
physical economy, this is expressed by the physical economic
relationship of the household to the economy as a whole.

The primary physical economic activity of a household is the ability to
produce, the *potential* to produce, creative ideas from among the
members of that household. That potential is a function of the physical
economic conditions, i.e. hard infrastructure (such as water, power,
transportation, etc.), level of technology, and soft infrastructure
(such as education, cultural and health, etc.) available to the members
of that household, through the action of universal principles acting on
this "local" moment from throughout space-time.

Thus, the tensor-like quantity associated with the measure of local
physical economic curvature must express the intersection, at a point in
the physical economic manifold, of the dynamically interacting
curvatures of the physical and cultural principles, acting from
throughout time, that are affecting, and being affected by, the creative
powers of the individuals of that household.

It may seem that this tensor-like quantity contains so many components
that its actual form is virtually impossible to express. However, this
is true only if a formal mathematical expression is sought. Gauss and
Riemann both showed that their functions of curvature could take
extremely complicated forms when expressed in formulas. Consequently,
they sought, and found, means to express the essential characteristics
in physical-geometric garb. The equivalent means for these physical
economic tensor-like quantities are the physical economic animations
designed by LaRouche.

In addition to curvature, the metric relations of the physical economy
also can be expressed by tensor-like magnitudes. This is also best
illustrated by example.

Look at the level of transportation available to the households of the
U.S.A. , which define a certain metric relationship between the
households and the economy as a whole, expressed as a geodesic in
physical economic space-time. This can be initially expressed by the
relationship among the various forms of water, rail, road, air,
pedestrian, bicycle, etc. transport accessible to that household, which
define a least-action pathway for that relationship. But the economic
significance of these forms of transport is relative to their
relationship to the organization of the economy as a whole.

To express this, one must look, as LaRouche suggested in his December
15, 2005 *Rebuilding the U.S.A.: Travel Among Cities* , at the
development of the transportation of North America from the early 17th
century onward. The physical geography of North America in the early 17
^th^ century can be characterized by a certain level of connectivity
associated with bays, inlets and river systems of the eastern coast, the
Appalachian mountain range, the Great Lakes, and the Ohio and
Mississippi-Missouri river systems. This level of connectivity is the
result of the bio-geological action from the beginning of the last ice
age.

This physical economic geography implies a potential continental
connectivity that can only be realized by the intervention of man. The
realization of that potential began with the development of water and
road systems within the eastern regions, followed by the initial
attempts to construct the systems to connect the costal region to the
continental interior, and to connect the river systems of the Ohio and
Mississippi river valleys together and to the Great Lakes.

The possibility to do this depended on the application of man's creative
powers to transform the bio-geological activity, as typified by the
construction of the Saugus iron works in the 17 ^th^ century
Massachusetts Bay Colony. This integrated manufacturing facility
utilized the water and biological capacity of the region to transform
bog iron into tools, nails and other useful items. The creation and
application of such "abiotic" products of biological and cognitive
action, further transformed the bio-geological characteristics of the
area. This transformation was the result of, and integral to, the
process which created a new social organization of man: the American
republic, the which made possible and necessitated an increase in the
physical-economic connectivity of the continent. This increase in
connectivity, effected through this interaction between abiotic, biotic
and cognitive processes, produced a corresponding increase in the
potential to increase the physical economic connectivity.

The introduction of rail changed this potential dramatically, not as a
substitute for water and road, but as a transformation of their
relationship to a higher form of physical economic connectivity. The
subsequent completion of the transcontinental railroad, the development
of a continental system of highways and air transport, further increased
the physical economic activity. This increase of connectivity must be
seen in light of corresponding increases in power generation,
locomotion, etc.

Further, this increase in connectivity must also be seen with respect to
the intention of which it is an effect. For example, the development of
the interstate highway system as a supplement to a national rail, water
and air transportation system linking concentrated small, medium and
large agro-industrial centers created by FDR's economic mobilization
during the middle of the last century, defines a certain qualitative
increase of economic connectivity. But, as an auxiliary of an intended
run-up in real-estate values, it becomes what it has become, a virtual
coast to coast parking lot on which the majority of Americans waste
billions of man hours per day, thus, decreasing the physical economic
connectivity of the continent.

Still further, when this continental transportation system is seen as
part of a global network whose intended effect is to increase the
physical economic connectivity of mankind, for the purpose of the
development of the continents of the earth, and integrated into the
development of a system of transport linking these parts of the earth to
nearby space, the moon, mars and beyond, an even higher quality of
physical economic connectivity is realized, with the corresponding
effect on the physical economic potential of the individual members of
society to produce creative ideas.

These changes are reflected as a corresponding change in the metric
relations of physical economic space and time expressed by a change in
the geodesics that express the paths of least-action in the physical
economy. This change defines the types of characteristics that must be
expressed by a metric tensor of physical economic space-time.

The only appropriate means for expressing such relationships are
tensor-like magnitudes that supercede the tensors of the Riemannian
type, the development of which, with the corresponding implications for
the physical and biological sciences, stands at the forefront of science
today.

::: {align="justify"}
:::

::: {align="justify"}
:::

::: {align="justify"}
:::

.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

NOTES

1\. []{#Footnote1} Lyndon H. LaRouche has added the following point of
emphasis:

What needs to be stressed, is the crucial distinction from the usual
presentation of the tensor, from a mathematical formalist standpoint, to
the tensor defined, as a physical conception, that from the standpoint
of physical anti-entropy.

The Riemannian tensor, as a physical conception, is intended to
represent a principle of anti-entropic disequilibrium: the actual
characteristic of the physical universe.

So, the concept of the Riemannian tensor does not proceed from the
mathematical formality to the physical reality, but, rather,
superimposes the concept of physical anti-entropy on the mere
mathematical scheme.

Think, for example, of the generation of the Kepler solar system, of the
World Harmonics, from a lonely, fast-spinning Sun. The universe is
driven by an ontological conception of universal anti-entropy; that is
what the experimental evidence shows. The mathematical conception must
be enslaved to the characteristic physical-experimental actuality.

There is where the lurking bear-trap lies, waiting to snare the
mathematical formalist!

2\. []{#Footnote2} Luther Pfahler Eisenhart *Riemannian Geometry* ,
Princeton University Press, 1926.

3\. []{#Footnote3} This, of course, is a characteristic of all
sophistry. The Sophist lies, but never explicitly states what he is
lying about.

4\. []{#Footnote4} Once stated in this ironical form, a means of
calculation can be elaborated. As Napier's development of logarithms,
Leibniz's calculation of Pi, or Gauss's development of the
hypergeoemtric series all indicate, such means of calculations must
express the ambiguities intrinsic to the original ironical form. This is
distinct from today's digital processors, who substitute real thought
for rapid brute force iterations.

5\. []{#Footnote5} One sees this feudalist conception of the universe
revived today in such popularly held beliefs as the so-called Copenhagen
interpretation of quantum mechanics, or the radical forms of information
theory associated with Wiener, von Neumann, et al., which insist that
the universe is fundamentally random and devoid of any possibility of
comprehension by man other than statistical description. This is the
argument that was at the core of the famous Einstein-Born
correspondence. See: *The Born-Einstein Letters* , Macmillian, 2005, and
Bruce Director, On the 375 ^th^ Anniversary of Kepler's Passing, Riemann
for Anti-Dummies 65, www.wlym.com

6\. []{#Footnote6} Kepler, *The Harmony of the World,* p. 496 *,*
translated by E.J. Aiton, A.M. Duncan, J.V. Field American Philosophical
Society, 1997.

7\. []{#Footnote7} See Johann Bernoulli, *Die Erste Integralrechnung* ,
1691, translated into German from the Latin by Dr. Gerhard Kowalewski
<http://historical.library.cornell.edu/math/index.html> , G.W. Leibniz,
*Two Papers on the Catenary Curve and Logarithmic Curve* , Acta
Eruditorum 1691, translated into English by Pierre Beaudry, Fidelio
Magazine, [www.schillerinstitute.org](http://www.schillerinstitute.org/)
, Bruce Director, *Justice for the Catenary* , Riemann for Anti-Dummies
,Part10, *Long Life of the Catenary* , [Riemann for Anti-Dummies, Part
41](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part41.html)

8\. []{#Footnote8} See LaRouche, *Principle of Powers, Box 12* ,
Executive Intelligence Review, December 23, 2005,
[www.larouchepub.com](http://www.larouchepub.com/)

9\. []{#Footnote9} See Boston LYM [pedagogy on
catenary](http://wlym.com/tiki/tiki-index.php?page=Paperclip%20Pedagogy%20for%20Calculus%20and%20Catenaries)
.

10\. []{#Footnote10} Leibniz showed this to be the arithmetic mean
between two exponential functions, a fact with enormous metaphysical
implications. (Leibniz, Op. Cit.)

11\. []{#Footnote11} Gauss, Carl, *Disquisitiones Generales Circa
Superficies Curvas,* 1828, Gauss *Werke* Vol. IV

12\. []{#Footnote12} In astronomy and geodesy, the normal is the plumb
bob and the sphere is the celestial sphere.

13\. []{#Footnote13} The normal, being perpendicular to the surface, is
extending into the space outside the surface.

14\. []{#Footnote14} Gauss's investigation of the properties of shortest
lines goes back to some of his earliest reflections on the insanity of
Euclidean geometry. One of his earliest entries in his diaries is a
remark about the Euclidean definition of a plane. For Gauss, the
characteristics of a plane and line could not be given *a priori* , but
only as a consequence of the physical characteristics (curvature) of the
surface.

15\. []{#Footnote15} A similar relationship exists for any polygon.

16\. []{#Footnote16} See LaRouche, *Principle of Power box 5* , Op. Cit.

17\. []{#Footnote17} See Bruce Director, *Archytas From the Standpoint
of Cusa, Gauss and Riemann,* [Riemann for Anti-Dummies, Part
42](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part42.html)

18\. []{#Footnote18} In the example of a triply-extended manifold there
would therefore be three surfaces intersecting at each point.

19\. []{#Footnote19} Tuillio Levi-Civita, who was a student of Gegorio
Ricci, who in turn was a student of Riemann's collaborator Enrico Betti
later introduced another, even simpler, way to find the curvature of a
surface element by measuring the change in the direction of a vector
that results when that vector is transported around a small area of the
surface, so as to always remain parallel to itself. Intuitively it would
seem that such an action would not cause a change in the direction of
the vector. On a flat surface that is true. But if the surface has any
curvature at all, the curvature itself will cause a change in the
direction. (See Figure 9.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/plugins/speed-booster-pack/inc/images/1x1.trans.gif){lazy-src="http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure09-riemann68.gif"
height="480" width="720"} \<img
src=\"http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/figure09-riemann68.gif\"
alt=\"\" height=\"480\" width=\"720\" />

20\. []{#Footnote20} It is important to note that that one component
expresses the dynamic relationship between the two parameters that
define the surface.

21\. []{#Footnote21} Denoted E, F, and G by Gauss.

22\. []{#Footnote22} These functions are the extension of Gauss's
functions E, F, and G for surfaces.

23\. []{#Footnote23} Riemann, Bernhard, *Mathematische Werke* . Berlin
1990, p. 435. Translation from Kolmogorov, Yushkevich, *Mathematics of
the 19 ^th^ Century* , translated by Roger Cooke, Birkhauser Verlag,
Berlin, 1996, p. 85.

24\. []{#Footnote24} See Bruce Director, *View from the Top,* [Riemann
for Anti-Dummies, Part 67](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part67.html)

25\. []{#Footnote25} See B., Riemann, *Beitrage zur Theorie der durch
die Gauss'sche Riehe...; Theorie der Abel'schen Functionen; Ueber die
Flache vom kleinsten Inhalt bei gegebener Begrenzung,* Riemann's
*Mathematische Werke* , Leipzig, 1892.

26\. []{#Footnote26} See Hal Vaughn, *Archimedean Polyhedra and the
Boundary: The Missing Link* , Twenty-First Century Science and
Technology, Summer 2005.

27\. []{#Footnote27} See B. Riemann, Op. Cit; Bruce Director, *Riemann
for Anti-Dummies Parts 52, 54, 61, 64.*

28\. []{#Footnote28} See LaRouche, *Vernadsky and Dirichlet's Principle*
and Bruce Director, *Bernhard Riemann's Dirichlet's Principle* ,
[Riemann for Anti-Dummies Part
58](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part58.html)

29\. []{#Footnote29} See Carl Gauss, *Nachlass zur Theorie Des
Arithmetishc-Geometrischen Mittels und der Modulfunktion* , uebersetzt
und herausgegeben von Dr. Harald Geppert, Ostwaldt's Klassiker der
Exakten Wissenschaften, Akademische Verlagsgesellschaft M.B.H. Leipzig,
1927; Bruce Director, *Gauss's Arithmetic-Geometric Mean: A Matter of
Precise Ambiguity* , [Riemann for Anti-Dummies, Part
66](http://wlym.com/antidummies/part66.html)

30\. []{#Footnote30} The paradigm for such a notion of time is Kepler's
notion of time with respect to planetary orbits. The planet's action at
any instant is only known as its relationship to the whole orbit.
Kepler's principle of equal areas expresses this notion of time.
:::

::: {.addtoany_share_save_container .addtoany_content_bottom}
::: {.a2a_kit .a2a_kit_size_32 .addtoany_list a2a-url="http://lymcanada.org/68/" a2a-title="Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 68 :  An Insider"}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F68%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2068%20%3A%20%20An%20Insider "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F68%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2068%20%3A%20%20An%20Insider "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/google_plus?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F68%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2068%20%3A%20%20An%20Insider "Google+"){.a2a_button_google_plus}
[](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd .addtoany_share_save}
:::
:::
:::

[ [ Posted on ]{.screen-reader-text} [February 20, 2010 February 24,
2019](http://lymcanada.org/68/) ]{.posted-on} [ [ [ Author
]{.screen-reader-text} [Bruce
Director](http://lymcanada.org/author/bdirector/){.url .fn .n} ]{.author
.vcard} ]{.byline} [ [ Categories ]{.screen-reader-text}
[EN](http://lymcanada.org/category/en/) , [Riemmann for
Anti-Dummies](http://lymcanada.org/category/science-1/c132-riemmann-for-anti-dummies/)
]{.cat-links}
