::: entry-header
# Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 69 : Change is All Ye Know On Earth --- And in Heaven {#riemann-for-anti-dummies-part-69-change-is-all-ye-know-on-earth-and-in-heaven .entry-title}
:::

::: entry-content
::: pf-content
## Change is All Ye Know On Earth--And in Heaven

by Bruce Director

It is one thing to re-utter Heraclites' fragment, "On those who enter
the same river, ever different waters flow", as the aphorism,"Nothing is
constant but change," as it has now become known, but it is entirely
different, and significantly more important, to know the meaning of what
Heraclites spoke. Even those who regard themselves as cognoscenti fail
to understand this, as more often than not, they mistakenly consider
change to be ephemeral. Competence in science, and more generally,
*sanity* , depends upon being free from this error, and the mental
obsessions that arise from it. However, such liberation comes not
through formal abstract contemplations, which are intrinsically
vulnerable to Eleatic-type sophistries, but, as Heraclites' original
formulation implies, through a pedagogical confrontation with the real,
physically changing universe itself--a confrontation that all humans
are, fortunately, blessed to experience. [ ]{#more-1233}

These days, such encounters are increasingly widespread. The unfolding
collapse of the physical economy is clashing with the prevailing
anti-science social relationships that have dominated the Baby Boomer
generation. For those who obsessively cling to these axioms, that
collapse appears as a shockingly unpredictable change in the way the
universe works. While this shock has prompted some to consider changing
their axioms, others still insist on denying the experimental evidence
that the collapse is both inevitable and underway. However, neither
reaction is appropriate to the circumstances. Those more rooted in
reality will recognize that the universe has not *changed* , but is, as
always, *changing* . What has appeared as an anomaly, is actually the
lawful and essential purge of both the flawed axioms of the Baby Boomer
culture, and the equally flawed belief that any axiomatic system could
prevail over the ever-changing, self-perfecting universe, whose
universal characteristic can be recognized as *anti-entropic* .

The only competent understanding of the term anti-entropic has been
supplied by Lyndon H. LaRouche, Jr. in his discoveries in the science of
physical economy. Yet the term has been misused by those who don't
understand science. The source of confusion centered around it points
directly to the underlying significance of Heraclites' principle. The
term *anti-entropy* does not signify a counter tendency to an otherwise
entropic universe. Entropy is merely a formal construct void of any real
existence. The real universe *is* essentially *anti-entropic* , which,
as Heraclites, Plato, and Cusa all emphasized, means that the universe
is everywhere changing, and nowhere contains a position, or condition,
of no-change. The prefix *anti,* signifies what the universe *is* , not
what it's not, just as Kaestner's, Gauss's and Riemann's use of the term
*anti-* Euclidean (as distinct from the axiomatic *non* -Euclidean
geometry of Bolyai and Lobachevsky), signified that in rejecting
Euclidean geometry, the human mind's role in the universe *is*
intrinsically creative, i.e. *anti-axiomatic* .

Therefore, as Kepler showed, there is no point of equal motion (equant)
in the otherwise non-uniform, always changing motions of the heavenly
bodies. Nor is there a state of thermodynamic equilibrium towards which
the universe is tending.
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"} Nor is there a Fukuyamaian end of history around
which the political pendulum swings left and right, nor a magically
stable formula for the value of money towards which the real physical
economy must bend.

These sophists' ploys, and the myriad of similar ones percolating
throughout popular cultural and scientific opinion, all stem from the
same pathology. They acknowledge the existence of change, while
insisting on the necessary co-existence of a state of no-change. Such
sophistries are rooted in the ancient Babylonian-type cult beliefs, such
as Aristotle's argument concerning the Perfection of God, which
considers evil to be co-equal with Good. But these two states are
mutually exclusive and cannot exist in the same universe. Once the
existence of change is shown to be an elementary characteristic of the
universe, as demonstrated most fundamentally by the physical efficiency
of the creative powers of the human mind, it is proven that a state of
Aristotelean stasis can exist only in the dead souls of sold-out
sophists, not in the real world. On the other hand, once one is induced
to accept the existence of a condition of no-change, then change is
falsely perceived to be merely a secondary characteristic, a type of
irrational deviation from a foolishly preferred, but illusory, state of
no-change. As Plato, Philo, Augustine, Cusa and Leibniz insisted, and
Kepler experimentally demonstrated, the Perfection of God and his
creation is not a fixed state, but is the ever-changing condition of
self-perfectability, expressed most perfectly by the creative powers of
the human mind, and the efficient power of that creative capacity to
produce change in the universe as a whole.

It is important to emphasize, however, that the frequent
misunderstanding of the term *anti-entropy* does not lie in the term
itself. It lies in the habituated ignorance of the fact that no truthful
concept can be expressed in any way other than by classical irony and
metaphor. All terms connected with truthful concepts reference an
implied irony associated with an ontological paradox from which that
concept arose. To reduce any concept to a term denoted by a fixed
definition, is to impose a form of thinking on the inherently creative
human mind, that intrinsically contradicts the ever-changing condition
of the real world, as in the case of the pathetic Thomas Gradgrind.
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"}

In thought, as in the physical world, there are no truthful fixed
definitions. Truthful statements concerning man and nature are both
thought and expressed only as self-perfecting ideas of the type that the
term *anti-entropy* denotes. To know an idea means to eternally
experience its recreation. The associated term signifies an
ever-deepening animation of the principle, such as the ever-changing
significance of the Pythagorean comma as expressed in a living
performance of J.S. Bach's bel canto well-tempered polyphonic
compositions and their elaboration, most notably, by Mozart and
Beethoven--especially the latter's late string quartets.

This is the spirit in which an investigation into the significance of
the notion of anti-entropy must be taken--a spirit expressed by Bernhard
Riemann's treatment of C.F. Gauss's hypergeometric function.

The Infinitesimal Makes All the Difference

The sign of genius is a little mark of manifold power. Kepler's
astronomical 8′, Gauss's astro-geophysical 16″, Plank's microphysical
quantized harmonic oscillators, Lincoln's transitory but immortal
Gettysburg address, or Mozart's enduringly brief Ave Verum, exemplify
the expression of eternal universal principles in a small expanse of
space-time. In this way, knowledge of the universe as a whole is
captured in its changing expression in the small, and the attention of
all knowledge is focused where it should be, on the characteristics of
the universe as a whole.
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"}

This idea was already known to ancient civilizations, as indicated by
Heraclites's aphorism, but it was Leibniz's development of the calculus
that gave a more perfected means of expression to it. For Leibniz, the
infinitesimal calculus, and his related science of dynamics, sought to
discover the characteristics of the universe as a whole, from within the
smallest reaches accessible to human investigation. This approach was
first developed in its modern form by Nicholas of Cusa's method of
*Docta Ignorantia* , which found its first experimental application in
Johannes Kepler's discovery of the harmonic principles of universal
gravitation. Taking his works as a single unfolding composition, Kepler
showed that the smallest changes in physical action reflect the global
characteristics of the entire universe. Recognizing that the expression
of these global characteristics is everywhere changing, Kepler insisted
that a new form of human expression must be created to be able to
capture this relationship and to communicate it within and among
generations. Knowing that the mortal portion of his life might prove too
brief to complete his work, he stated the problem in { *The New
Astronomy* } so that even his own death would not hinder his effort to
produce a result.

Cusa's and Kepler's method stands in sharp contrast to the inferior,
hostile reactions of Galilean empiricism and Cartesian mechanism. These
latter sought to undermine the progress in human knowledge gained by
Cusa and Kepler, by disconnecting the changes measured in small
intervals, from the universe as a whole. These reactionary efforts were
dealt a further blow with Pierre de Fermat's elaboration of the
principle of least-time. Fermat recognized that non-constant change was
not limited to planetary motion, but was a fundamental characteristic of
the physical universe. Kepler and Willibrod Snell had already discovered
that the path of refracted light was dependent, not on the uniform
relationship between the angle of incidence and the angle of refraction,
but on the non-linear relationship between the sines of theses angles.
Fermat threw the Cartesians into a snit fit by demonstrating that this
non-linear characteristic of refracted light is an effect of a universal
principle of least-time. He proved that the change in the direction of
the path of light at the boundary between two media, is determined so as
to minimize the time it took the light to travel the total path. This
implies that a global characteristic, i.e. total time, is determining
the position of the light as it travels along its way. The Cartesians
argued that this could not be so because that would imply that a
metaphysical intention, not a physical mechanism, determined the path of
light. But the scientific evidence was irrefutable, and Fermat was
defended vigorously by Leibniz, who insisted that a created universe, in
which human creativity is an active principle, could have it no other
way.

Responding to these provocations of Kepler and Fermat, Leibniz
contributed the expression Kepler demanded: *the idea of the
infinitesimal as an expression of an ever-changing universal principle*
. Leibniz realized that to express physical action as an effect of a
principle of change, the relationship between the universal expression
of a principle, and its everywhere non-constantly changing
manifestation, must be captured. This he succeeded in doing through his
elaboration of the mutually inverse relationship of the differential and
integral forms of the infinitesimal calculus, which, in more general
physical terms, he called the *science of dynamics* .

Though the above reported summary is a matter of indisputable scientific
and historical fact, the overwhelming majority of scientists today are
completely ignorant of it, owing to a concerted campaign against
Leibniz, which attempted to suppress Leibniz's work in favor of the
black magic hoaxster Isaac Newton. The purpose of this attack was not an
arcane scientific debate, but a deliberate effort on the part of the
Anglo-Dutch remnant of the Roman and Venetian oligarchy, to prevent the
source of Leibniz's discovery of the calculus, not only from forming the
basis for a continuation of the Renaissance science of Cusa and Kepler,
but from also becoming the basis for reorganizing human social relations
according to the principle of the sovereign nation-states, whose purpose
and existence is to defend and foster the sovereign creative powers of
the individual human mind. The connection between the prominence of
Leibniz's concept of happiness as a founding principle of the United
States of America, with Leibniz's notion of the infinitesimal calculus,
as defended by the Leibnizian collaborator of Benjamin Franklin, A.G.
Kaestner, illustrates this point.

The widespread acceptance today of the attacks on Leibniz is
demonstrated by the common, but fraudulent way in which the calculus is
introduced to secondary school students and undergraduates in
universities. In these classes, the students are usually first
introduced, by formal definition, to Augustin Cauchy's notion of a
"derivative". Then, after a generous amount of histrionics concerning
little deltas and epsilons, the student is let in on another formal
procedure identified as integrals, which is presented as the formal
inversion of the derivative. If the student has been successfully
brainwashed at this point, (either by failing to master the formalism
and thus falsely believing himself to be an "artistic" rather than a
scientific person, or, what is just as damaging, by foolishly believing
that mastering the formalism certifies him as, "good at math and
science"), he or she will be allowed to enter the higher reaches of the
academic temple. At this point the student is introduced into the heady
world of differential equations, which he is told from the very
beginning, are equations that are for the most part "unsolvable", but
for which a great body of formal rules have been written. The student is
then doomed to destroy whatever is left of his or her creativity in
mastering these rules.
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"}

This method of teaching is not only destructive, it is, in scientific
terminology, ass-backward. Calculus instruction should proceed, first
and foremost, in the historical context in which it developed, as
summarized above. Then the student should be provoked to rediscover it
as Leibniz discovered it, first with a study of *differential functions*
. Then Leibniz's notion of the differential and the integral are easily
understood. Such an approach is the only one that has ever produced any
scientific discoveries since Leibniz's day, and all other methods are
intrinsically impotent.

Differential functions, as Leibniz designed them, state a physical
problem in the mode of classical irony: " *What are the characteristics
of a universal principle which produce the perfectly infinitesimal
changes in the investigated physical action?* " The fact that such
equations may not have a formal mathematical "solution" is of no
significance, as ironical statements, not formal definitions, state
principles
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"} . As Gauss and Riemann later showed, such
solutions can be known by freeing science from the restrictions of
formal mathematics, and entering the ironical domain of what Leibniz
called: *analysis situs* .

The paradigmatic example of Leibniz's method can be illustrated by the
history of the catenary principle. The first major demonstration of the
physical principle expressed by a hanging chain was Brunelleschi's
successful construction of the Dome over the church of Santa Maria del
Fiore in Florence, nearly 200 years before Leibniz and Johann Bernoulli
elaborated the physics of the catenary. Nevertheless, Brunelleschi not
only grasped the principle, without a formal mathematical expression,
but he was able to communicate that principle sufficiently to the
workmen charged with carrying out its construction, that they could
implement the project as if the idea were their own. To this day
Brunelleschi's Dome stands as a monument to the powers of the human
mind, and the inadequacy of formal mathematics.

In their subsequent study of the physics of the matter, Leibniz and
Bernoulli confronted the fact that the catenary could not be expressed
by any of the formal mathematical expressions known at that time.
Galileo had fudged the matter by trying to fit the catenary into the
shape of a parabola. Rejecting such foolishness, Bernoulli expressed the
shape of the chain as a function of the changing physical effect of
gravity and tension that was acting on the chain. Though he could write
down this relationship formally, by what Leibniz called a differential
function, he could not give it a more precise expression. Yet Leibniz
did, expressing the catenary principle with respect to his more general
understanding of Napier's principle of logarithmic functions.
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"} In so doing, Leibniz established the physically
functional relationship among circular and logarithmic functions, laying
the basis for its deeper expression by Gauss and Riemann in the complex
domain.

From this point on, all progress in physical science can be
characterized as further elaborations of the essential point of
Leibniz's method: *it is change that is primary, and the fundamental
unit of change is the universe as a whole* .

As Leibniz states in his *Discourse on Metaphysics* :

I am quite willing to admit that we are subject to deception when we
wish to determine God's ends or counsels. But this is only when we try
to limit them to some particular design, believing that he had only one
thing in view, when instead he regards everything at the same time. For
instance, it is a great mistake to believe that God made the world only
of us, although it is quite true that he made it in its entirety for us
and that there is nothing in the universe which does not affect us and
does not also accommodate itself in accordance with his regard for us,
following the principles set forth above.

This is what B. Riemann was referring to in his famous statement, "It is
well known that scientific physics has existed only since the invention
of the differential calculus."

The Physics of Global Effects

Differential functions indicate deeper underlying characteristics of the
universe than are evident from sense certainty. For example, formal
geometry, backed up by sense certainty, tells us that the circle is a
bounded curve with everywhere constant curvature. Yet, as the work of
Cusa, Kepler, Fermat and Leibniz demonstrate there is no such action in
the physical world. Instead, as the case of the catenary and refracted
light attest, physical action depends on the non-uniform functions, such
as, in this case, the sine function. But the sine function exists as
part of a connected group of periodic functions, whose relationship to
each other is expressed by their mutually connected principles of
change, or, in Leibniz's terms, their differentials. For example, the
differential of the sine function is the cosine function, and the
differential of the cosine function is minus the sine function.
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"} In this way, the circle can be defined, as it
really exists, as that curvature formed by periodic functions whose
differentials are related in this way. Similarly, Leibniz discovered the
general principle underlying Napier's logarithmic/exponential functions,
as that unique self-similar function whose differential is equal to the
function itself.
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"} It is from this standpoint that Leibniz was able
to recognize the connection between the circular and logarithmic
functions which underlies the principle of the catenary.

The superiority of Leibniz's method, which he demonstrated by the
solution to the catenary problem, was just the beginning. Leibniz, the
Bernoullis, and Leibniz's other collaborators, began immediately
applying that method to other physical problems, which produced more
complex differential functions. In the case of the catenary, for
example, the position of the links of the chain, is a function of the
changing relationship between the effect of gravity and tension on the
chain. But if the chain is set into a vertical oscillatory motion, as
when someone walks across a rope bridge, a second order change is
introduced. In that case, there is the changing relationship between
gravity and tension, *and* a change in that change.
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"}

Such second order effects are pervasive in dynamic action. Planetary
orbits, pendula, wave motion, electro-magnetic effects, geomagnetism,
thermodynamics, vibrating strings and membranes, are just a few examples
whose physical characteristics result from such second order effects.
What distinguishes the differential function that expresses one process
from another is the relationship among the underlying first and second
order principles of change.
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"}

For example, in the case of a circular pendulum, the bob travels along a
circular arc. But its motion along that arc is accelerated due to the
effect of the gravitational potential. As Leibniz showed, there is a
connected relationship between the position of the bob, its speed, and
the rate at which its speed is changing, which is governed by the
dynamic, (metaphysical) principle that he called *vis viva* . These
functions are united under a single principle, or as Leibniz
characterized it: the full effect is equal to the full cause. Thus, the
position of the bob is not determined by the angle the string makes with
the vertical, but by the rate of change of that angle, which itself is
always changing by a well-defined second order change. Though a
differential function could be defined which expressed this second order
relationship, none of the functions known in Leibniz's time corresponded
to it. Later, Gauss, and others, realized that this type of differential
function implied a new species of transcendental function "defined" not
directly, but as the "solution" to a physically determined differential
function.
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"} Since this differential function corresponded to
the same type of action associated with planetary orbits, it became
known as an elliptical transcendental.

In this way, Leinbiz's successors, most notably, Legendre, Pfaff, Gauss
and his collaborators such as Dirichlet, Bessel, and others, discovered
an entire zoology of functions that described physical processes. One
significant example is the case of the so-called "Bessel" functions
named for Gauss's collaborator, Wilhelm Bessel who, along with Gauss,
was investigating the "comma" associated with planetary perturbations.
Kepler had already indicated that the characteristics of a planet's
elliptical orbit, such as eccentricity, were not fixed, but are changing
with the development of the solar system.
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"} This reflects an effect in the harmonic ordering
of the solar system analogous to the Pythagorean comma in music.
However, in the case of the major planets, these changes are so slow and
small that they were below the error of measurement at that time. But
after the discovery of the asteroids, these small effects became subject
to investigation. In this regard, Bessel investigated the functional
relationship of the mean and eccentric anomalies with respect to a
changing eccentricity. This gave rise to a differential function given
his name.
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"}

These types of functions
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"} were entirely new, and could not be expressed in
terms of previously accepted formal mathematics. This posed an
existential crisis for the anti-creative empiricists. If the
experimental evidence indicated that the physical universe was acting
according to principles that were not represented by formal mathematics,
how could the mathematicians calculate formulas that corresponded to the
real world? Faced with the prospect of choosing between formal
mathematics and the real world, they attempted to approximate these
functions using curve-fitting statistical methods.
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"} This approach, typified by Euler, Laplace and
Lagrange, ultimately failed, because no matter how numerically close the
statistical methods were in large intervals, an everywhere-changing
principle of change is never susceptible of being truly captured by
numerical approximation and these statistical methods broke down in the
small.

The statistical approach became totally discredited by Gauss's famous
determination of the orbit of Ceres. In that case, Gauss alone solved
the problem of determining Ceres' orbit, because he recognized that the
small interval of Piazzi's observations, must reflect the harmonic
ordering of the solar system as a single dynamic process. Where all the
others were trying to compute Ceres orbit from statistical methods,
Gauss used the method of Kepler and Leibniz. As the October 1801
re-sighting of Ceres attests, Gauss was right, and the others were
wrong.
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"}

However, Gauss was not satisfied with just knowing the animals in the
zoo of differential functions. Rather than accepting a zoology of
Aristotelean categories, each with their special quirks and habits,
Gauss investigated the nature of the *species* of which all the animals
were a part. He recognized that all the differential functions that
arose from the investigations of the physical universe, were special
cases of a more general differential function, whose solution is what he
called, *the hypergeometric function* .

As with much of Gauss's work, his published treatise on the
hypergeometric function covers only a small part of his ideas. Some of
the rest is contained in fragmentary entries in his notebooks, and much
remained only in his mind. Fortunately, Riemann had access to both, and
applying his own creative insights to the foundation laid down by Gauss,
he elaborated the nature of the species that today is associated with
the idea of *Riemannian physical hypergeometries* . As he stated in his
1857 treatise on the subject:

In the following work I have treated these transcendental functions by a
new method, which essentially remains applicable to any of those
functions that satisfy a linear differential equation with algebraic
coefficients. What previously had been found only by troublesome
calculations, this approach yields almost directly from the definition.
What has been done in the part of the work presented here, chiefly in
view of their numerous applications in physics and astronomy, is to give
a suitable overview of the possible representations of the functions.
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"}

Riemann's ideas are contained in this published treatise, as well as a
series of notes of his 1858/1859 winter semester lectures.
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"} In his author's introduction to the published
work, Riemann specifies his approach:

In the work announced here a method has been applied to these
transcendentals, whose principles have been discussed in my inaugural
dissertation (section 20) and which yields all previous results almost
without calculation.
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"}

In that doctoral dissertation, Riemann had shown that physical
principles, which themselves are not accessible via sense perception,
can be expressed by the global characteristics, specifically the
boundary conditions and singularities, of a complex function and, that
these characteristics determine completely the behavior of the function
in the infinitesimally small.

Riemann built his method primarily on the work of Gauss and Dirichlet on
*potential* functions which arose in the investigation of
electromagnetic, geomagnetic and thermodynamic effects. These functions
sought to express these physical effects by the essential
characteristics of the underlying principle. Those characteristics are
expressed as a set of two or more families of curves which are
everywhere mutually orthogonal. These curves are the pathways of minimum
and maximum changes in the potential and thus express a physical
principle of least-action. Gauss and Dirichlet showed that this
principle of least-action is primary, and that the boundary conditions
such as, for example, the surface of a magnet or electrical body,
determines the specific shape of the curves. In this way, the physical
principle of least action determines the physical-geometrical "shape" of
physical space time--a principle that Riemann famously termed,
"Dirichlet's Principle". (See Figure 1). Riemann recognized that this
physical principle of least action can be expressed uniquely by complex
functions.

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/01-riemann69.gif)

However, Riemann understood that a boundary, in the most general sense,
is where the characteristics of change, *fundamentally change* .
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"} This does not necessarily mean a definite place,
such as at the surface of a magnetic or electric body, but a *definite,
fundamental change* in the principles acting, such as in the case of the
boundary between abiotic, biotic and cognitive processes.
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"}

In the differential functions, this higher form of change is indicated
when the differential function appears to become infinite. But as Cusa
recognized, the appearance of the infinite in the finite is not an
indication of something "out of this world", but the footprint of a new
principle that is acting on the boundary of the old, affecting it
everywhere, in the infinitesimally small.

This relationship is brought out when the associated differential
functions are expressed using Riemann's geometrical method of expressing
complex functions. In that case, the number of singularities determines
the global characteristics, and vice versa. For example, Figure 2
illustrates a transformation of a potential function with two
singularities (principles) to one with seven. Notice that as more
singularities are added, the internal relationships *fundamentally*
change, while the orthogonal characteristic of the principle of
least-action is maintained.
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"} Significantly, each new singularity (principle)
is added *discontinuously* .
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"}

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/02-riemann69.gif){width="720"
height="480"}

The emergence of the new singularities, like a creative discovery of a
new physical or artistic principle, entirely changes the global
characteristics of the manifold. This is exemplified by Kepler's
determination that there was no equant, which meant that the global
characteristics of the universe were entirely different than those
assumed by Ptolemy, Copernicus and Brahe.
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"} Though gravity existed prior to Kepler's
discovery, his discovery of it *fundamentally changed* , gravity's role
in the universe, as Kepler brought it into the province of the human
mind.

Riemann further demonstrated that the emergence of singularities was a
physical necessity, not a mathematical effect. Most notable in this
regard is his famous demonstration of the existence of shockwaves,
decades before their experimental demonstration. In his study
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"} , Riemann shows that a process expressed by an
otherwise continuous differential function, will necessarily reach a
boundary condition where a singularity (shock wave) will occur. The
formation of this shock wave redefines the characteristics of the entire
process.

From this standpoint, Riemann defined a higher function, which he called
the " *P* -function" of which the hypergeometric function is a special
case. Much to the chagrin of the formalists, Riemann never wrote down a
formula for this function, but described it only by the number of
singularities, and the behavior of the function at those points. In this
way, Riemann showed that if these minimum number of conditions were
specified, the entire characteristics of the potential function, in
every infinitesimally small interval, are determined, *without the need
for calculation* .

From this Riemannian standpoint, Heraclites' aphorism takes on an
entirely new light. *Nothing is constant but change, but change itself
must change* .

The Harmonics of Global Effects

Riemann's *P* -function, and his associated study of abelian functions,
has implications far beyond an expression for a species of physical
differential functions. It provides a foundation for developing a
concept for a higher type of functional relationship, that expresses the
anti-entropic nature of a universe, self-developing into higher states
of organization and existence. Such a function is characterized by an
ever-increasing density of *harmonically ordered* singularities. Like
Riemann's *P* -function, this concept cannot be expressed by any
mathematical formula. Only the methods learned from classical irony and
metaphor will suffice.

The earliest known developed form of this investigation is associated
with the Pythagoreans, who found, in the relationship between musical
and geometrical harmonies, a reflection of the characteristics of
universal principles. Most notable in this regard is Archytas's
remarkable construction for the doubling of the cube, and his related
work on musical harmonics. As Plato documents in his dialogues, these
discovered harmonic relationships reflect the true characteristics of a
developing universe, and the deliberate power of the human mind to
discover and master them. At the behest of his oligarchical masters,
Aristotle denigrated this harmonic connection, between human creativity
and the universe as a whole, to a mere accident, laying the basis for
modern empiricism and fascism. The popular acceptance of Aristotle's
view over Plato's among the Greek-speaking states, led, as Aeschylus,
Archytas and Plato warned, to a degeneration from the higher levels of
scientific, artistic, technological and culture development previously
achieved, and to the ultimate dominance of Europe by the oligarchical
system, but for a few notable exceptions, for nearly 1500 years.

With the dominance of Aristotle finally shattered by Cusa, his follower,
Kepler, picked up the study of harmonics where the Greeks stopped. In
the first three books of his *Harmony of the World* , Kepler summarizes,
in a more advanced form, the most significant discoveries of harmonics
that had been achieved by Greek culture. There he shows the connection
among the harmonic divisions of the circle, sphere and musical scale.
Further, in the concluding fourth and fifth books, Kepler shows that the
non-uniform periodic motion of the planets, when taken from the
standpoint of the solar system as a whole, reflects these same harmonic
relationships.
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"}

However, when these Keplerian harmonics are re-examined from the
standpoint of Gauss and Riemann, an even higher form of harmonics
emerges.

As Kepler shows in recapitulating the Greek understanding of the matter,
the regular divisions of the circle are distinguished from one another
by the degrees of "knowability" through which their magnitudes are
constructed. Each new division requires a new species of magnitude.
Kepler understood from Cusa that all these degrees of knowability are
subsumed by a higher, transcendental, species of magnitude, later
understood, as discussed above, to be expressed by the periodic and
non-uniform circular functions.

But Gauss recognized that the regular divisions of the circle are
produced by the unique harmonic characteristics intrinsic to these
periodic non-uniform functions.
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"} Each regular division, Gauss showed, is, like a
planetary orbit, a unique form of harmonic motion. Thus, from the
standpoint of sense certainty, the regular plane figures may appear as
equal divisions of the circle, but their true origin lies in the
harmonics of non-uniform motion. Further, Gauss discovered, these
harmonic "orbits" are themselves harmonically ordered, as reflected in
the different degrees of knowability of their associated magnitudes.
Once he had this higher harmonic relationship in view, Gauss was able to
recognize that the so-called "constructable" magnitudes were limited to
certain harmonic values. This allowed him to see at once the extension
of the constructable magnitudes to the 17-gon and other similar higher
divisions.

As Kepler notes, the harmonic divisions of the circle only partially
reflect the harmonics of the physical world, because they are harmonic
divisions of a curve, and the world is a globe. Thus, in the tradition
of the Pythagoreans, he turned first to the higher harmonic
relationships of the sphere. The constantly curved sphere, Kepler
showed, expressed these harmonics (which he called by the Latin word
congruence) in the regular and semi-regular solids. Gauss showed, with
his work on curved surfaces and Napier's pentagramma mirificum, that
these harmonics reflect the periodicity of spherical curvature. As
Gauss's work indicates, and these harmonics reflect, the everywhere
constantly curved spherical surface, is only the visible form of an
underlying non-uniform periodic hypergeometric function.

But, as Kepler's treatment of musical harmonics shows, the harmonics of
curves and surfaces are still not sufficient. First, as is evident from
the bel-canto polyphony, the musical harmonics cannot be derived from
the harmonics of curves and surfaces and, second, the physical harmonics
of the solar system reflect these two, related, but distinct harmonic
relations as arising from a single principle.

Therefore, a higher species must be sought from which a form of
*hypergeometric harmonics* can unfold. Riemann's *P* -function provides
an insight into the sought-for principle. As Riemann showed, the global
characteristics of his *P* -function generate such a higher form of
harmonics, as the consequence of hypergeometric periodicity.

Though the mind can see clearly these hypergeometric periodicities, they
can not be directly visualized as in the case of a curve or sphere.
Nevertheless, Riemann provided a geometrical metaphor
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"} to express the principle relationships. He
applied the same method to his *P* -function.

As discussed above, Riemann showed that the essential characteristics of
all physical functions are determined by the number of singularities,
and the behavior of the function at these points. The simplest
hypergeometric case specifies three such singularities. Thus, when the
solution of the hypergeometric function is expressed by Riemann's
geometrical method of complex functions, it maps a hemisphere onto a
triangle, with the singularities corresponding to the vertices. The
behavior of the function at these points is expressed by the angles at
each vertex. (See Figure 3.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/03a-riemann69.gif){width="720"
height="480"}

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/03b-riemann69.gif){width="319"
height="480"}

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/03c-riemann69.gif){width="197"
height="480"}

Riemann then constructed a periodic function from the hypergeometric
function, by mapping one hemisphere to a triangle, the remaining
hemisphere to a neighboring triangle, a second layer of the first
hemisphere to another triangle, and so forth. The singularities are
always mapped to the vertices, and the behavior of the function at those
points is expressed by the angles that the boundary of the triangle
makes at those points. Riemann noted that if the sum of the angles of
such a triangle is greater than 180 degrees, then the triangle is a
spherical one. If it is equal to 180 degrees, the triangle is planar.
And if the sum is less than 180 degrees, the triangle is negatively
curved.

In general, the triangles generated from this periodic hypergeometric
function will not form, what Kepler called a congruence, or harmonic
relationship, except in those cases where the angles formed by the sides
of these triangles correspond to certain harmonic values. In the case of
the spherical angles, that corresponds to the angles of the five regular
solids. (See Figure 4.).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/04a-riemann69.gif){width="720"
height="480"}

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/04b-riemann69.gif){width="290"
height="480"}

In the case of plane angles, that corresponds to the angles of the
elliptic function. (See Figure 5.).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/05a-riemann69.gif){width="720"
height="480"}

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/05b-riemann69.gif){width="423"
height="480"}

In the case of negatively curved surfaces, that corresponds to the
angles of the hyper-elliptical and abelian functions. (See Figure 6.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/06a-riemann69.gif){width="720"
height="480"}

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/06b-riemann69.gif){width="467"
height="480"}

Thus, the five regular solids are unique, harmonic values of a
hypergeometric function, among a larger set of hypergeometric harmonics.

In this way, Riemann showed that functions with an increasing number of
singularities can be constructed as the inverse of such a hypergeometric
periodic function. Further, a notion can be formed from this of a higher
function that encompasses this succession of periodic functions. Such a
notion provides a first glimpse of the global characteristics from which
*hypergeometric harmonies,* unfold.

Yet, as Kepler's experimental evidence indicates, the actual harmonics
of the physical universe are much more complex. Kepler's harmonic
relationships among the planetary orbits are not perfect, but indicate a
higher principle, a more complex global principle of change governing
planetary motion, than is indicated when the harmonic relations are
derived from a lower level. This higher principle was, in part,
discovered by Gauss's determination of the orbit of Ceres and his
discovery that planetary motion was associated with the higher harmonic
principle of the arithmetic-geometric mean. That was extended still
further, with Gauss's and Riemann's demonstration that this was a
special case of the hypergeometric function.

That higher harmonic relationship is indicated in what should not seem
like another domain: J.S. Bach's compositions of bel-canto well-tempered
polyphony. Bach's demonstration of the higher powers of human cognition
through his compositions, further points to the nature of the higher
harmonics at work in the organization of the universe as a whole.
Beethoven's extension of Bach's method, most notably in his late string
quartets, leads us even further into an understanding of these higher
harmonics.

Such an approach must now be taken, as Riemann indicated in his
habilitation dissertation, into the investigation of the microphysical
and astrophysical domains. Already, the experimental evidence amassed
since Riemann's time has indicated the existence of very complex
harmonic orderings in these domains.
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"} Yet the resurgence of the Aristotelean belief in
a mythical state of no-change, as exemplified by the Copenhagen school's
interpretation of quantum mechanics insistence on an ultimately random,
i.e., non-changing, universe, has led the majority of scientists on a
fools errand of either developing statistical models, or searching for a
new form of mathematical formalism that tries to divine the appearance
of change as an effect of no-change.

All such efforts have and will fail. What is needed is a fresh look.
One, based on Cusa, Kepler, Leibniz, Gauss, Riemann and LaRouche that
strives from these complex harmonies, to hear the composition as a
whole.

Happily, the impetus for such a change is already underway.
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"}
:::

::: {.addtoany_share_save_container .addtoany_content_bottom}
::: {.a2a_kit .a2a_kit_size_32 .addtoany_list a2a-url="http://lymcanada.org/69/" a2a-title="Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 69 :  Change is All Ye Know On Earth — And in Heaven"}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F69%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2069%20%3A%20%20Change%20is%20All%20Ye%20Know%20On%20Earth%20%E2%80%94%20And%20in%20Heaven "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F69%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2069%20%3A%20%20Change%20is%20All%20Ye%20Know%20On%20Earth%20%E2%80%94%20And%20in%20Heaven "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/google_plus?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F69%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2069%20%3A%20%20Change%20is%20All%20Ye%20Know%20On%20Earth%20%E2%80%94%20And%20in%20Heaven "Google+"){.a2a_button_google_plus}
[](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd .addtoany_share_save}
:::
:::
:::

[ [ Posted on ]{.screen-reader-text} [February 20, 2010 February 24,
2019](http://lymcanada.org/69/) ]{.posted-on} [ [ [ Author
]{.screen-reader-text} [Bruce
Director](http://lymcanada.org/author/bdirector/){.url .fn .n} ]{.author
.vcard} ]{.byline} [ [ Categories ]{.screen-reader-text}
[EN](http://lymcanada.org/category/en/) , [Riemmann for
Anti-Dummies](http://lymcanada.org/category/science-1/c132-riemmann-for-anti-dummies/)
]{.cat-links}

::: entry-header
# Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 69 : Change is All Ye Know On Earth --- And in Heaven {#riemann-for-anti-dummies-part-69-change-is-all-ye-know-on-earth-and-in-heaven-1 .entry-title}
:::

::: entry-content
::: pf-content
## Change is All Ye Know On Earth--And in Heaven

by Bruce Director

It is one thing to re-utter Heraclites' fragment, "On those who enter
the same river, ever different waters flow", as the aphorism,"Nothing is
constant but change," as it has now become known, but it is entirely
different, and significantly more important, to know the meaning of what
Heraclites spoke. Even those who regard themselves as cognoscenti fail
to understand this, as more often than not, they mistakenly consider
change to be ephemeral. Competence in science, and more generally,
*sanity* , depends upon being free from this error, and the mental
obsessions that arise from it. However, such liberation comes not
through formal abstract contemplations, which are intrinsically
vulnerable to Eleatic-type sophistries, but, as Heraclites' original
formulation implies, through a pedagogical confrontation with the real,
physically changing universe itself--a confrontation that all humans
are, fortunately, blessed to experience. [ ]{#more-1233}

These days, such encounters are increasingly widespread. The unfolding
collapse of the physical economy is clashing with the prevailing
anti-science social relationships that have dominated the Baby Boomer
generation. For those who obsessively cling to these axioms, that
collapse appears as a shockingly unpredictable change in the way the
universe works. While this shock has prompted some to consider changing
their axioms, others still insist on denying the experimental evidence
that the collapse is both inevitable and underway. However, neither
reaction is appropriate to the circumstances. Those more rooted in
reality will recognize that the universe has not *changed* , but is, as
always, *changing* . What has appeared as an anomaly, is actually the
lawful and essential purge of both the flawed axioms of the Baby Boomer
culture, and the equally flawed belief that any axiomatic system could
prevail over the ever-changing, self-perfecting universe, whose
universal characteristic can be recognized as *anti-entropic* .

The only competent understanding of the term anti-entropic has been
supplied by Lyndon H. LaRouche, Jr. in his discoveries in the science of
physical economy. Yet the term has been misused by those who don't
understand science. The source of confusion centered around it points
directly to the underlying significance of Heraclites' principle. The
term *anti-entropy* does not signify a counter tendency to an otherwise
entropic universe. Entropy is merely a formal construct void of any real
existence. The real universe *is* essentially *anti-entropic* , which,
as Heraclites, Plato, and Cusa all emphasized, means that the universe
is everywhere changing, and nowhere contains a position, or condition,
of no-change. The prefix *anti,* signifies what the universe *is* , not
what it's not, just as Kaestner's, Gauss's and Riemann's use of the term
*anti-* Euclidean (as distinct from the axiomatic *non* -Euclidean
geometry of Bolyai and Lobachevsky), signified that in rejecting
Euclidean geometry, the human mind's role in the universe *is*
intrinsically creative, i.e. *anti-axiomatic* .

Therefore, as Kepler showed, there is no point of equal motion (equant)
in the otherwise non-uniform, always changing motions of the heavenly
bodies. Nor is there a state of thermodynamic equilibrium towards which
the universe is tending.
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"} Nor is there a Fukuyamaian end of history around
which the political pendulum swings left and right, nor a magically
stable formula for the value of money towards which the real physical
economy must bend.

These sophists' ploys, and the myriad of similar ones percolating
throughout popular cultural and scientific opinion, all stem from the
same pathology. They acknowledge the existence of change, while
insisting on the necessary co-existence of a state of no-change. Such
sophistries are rooted in the ancient Babylonian-type cult beliefs, such
as Aristotle's argument concerning the Perfection of God, which
considers evil to be co-equal with Good. But these two states are
mutually exclusive and cannot exist in the same universe. Once the
existence of change is shown to be an elementary characteristic of the
universe, as demonstrated most fundamentally by the physical efficiency
of the creative powers of the human mind, it is proven that a state of
Aristotelean stasis can exist only in the dead souls of sold-out
sophists, not in the real world. On the other hand, once one is induced
to accept the existence of a condition of no-change, then change is
falsely perceived to be merely a secondary characteristic, a type of
irrational deviation from a foolishly preferred, but illusory, state of
no-change. As Plato, Philo, Augustine, Cusa and Leibniz insisted, and
Kepler experimentally demonstrated, the Perfection of God and his
creation is not a fixed state, but is the ever-changing condition of
self-perfectability, expressed most perfectly by the creative powers of
the human mind, and the efficient power of that creative capacity to
produce change in the universe as a whole.

It is important to emphasize, however, that the frequent
misunderstanding of the term *anti-entropy* does not lie in the term
itself. It lies in the habituated ignorance of the fact that no truthful
concept can be expressed in any way other than by classical irony and
metaphor. All terms connected with truthful concepts reference an
implied irony associated with an ontological paradox from which that
concept arose. To reduce any concept to a term denoted by a fixed
definition, is to impose a form of thinking on the inherently creative
human mind, that intrinsically contradicts the ever-changing condition
of the real world, as in the case of the pathetic Thomas Gradgrind.
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"}

In thought, as in the physical world, there are no truthful fixed
definitions. Truthful statements concerning man and nature are both
thought and expressed only as self-perfecting ideas of the type that the
term *anti-entropy* denotes. To know an idea means to eternally
experience its recreation. The associated term signifies an
ever-deepening animation of the principle, such as the ever-changing
significance of the Pythagorean comma as expressed in a living
performance of J.S. Bach's bel canto well-tempered polyphonic
compositions and their elaboration, most notably, by Mozart and
Beethoven--especially the latter's late string quartets.

This is the spirit in which an investigation into the significance of
the notion of anti-entropy must be taken--a spirit expressed by Bernhard
Riemann's treatment of C.F. Gauss's hypergeometric function.

The Infinitesimal Makes All the Difference

The sign of genius is a little mark of manifold power. Kepler's
astronomical 8′, Gauss's astro-geophysical 16″, Plank's microphysical
quantized harmonic oscillators, Lincoln's transitory but immortal
Gettysburg address, or Mozart's enduringly brief Ave Verum, exemplify
the expression of eternal universal principles in a small expanse of
space-time. In this way, knowledge of the universe as a whole is
captured in its changing expression in the small, and the attention of
all knowledge is focused where it should be, on the characteristics of
the universe as a whole.
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"}

This idea was already known to ancient civilizations, as indicated by
Heraclites's aphorism, but it was Leibniz's development of the calculus
that gave a more perfected means of expression to it. For Leibniz, the
infinitesimal calculus, and his related science of dynamics, sought to
discover the characteristics of the universe as a whole, from within the
smallest reaches accessible to human investigation. This approach was
first developed in its modern form by Nicholas of Cusa's method of
*Docta Ignorantia* , which found its first experimental application in
Johannes Kepler's discovery of the harmonic principles of universal
gravitation. Taking his works as a single unfolding composition, Kepler
showed that the smallest changes in physical action reflect the global
characteristics of the entire universe. Recognizing that the expression
of these global characteristics is everywhere changing, Kepler insisted
that a new form of human expression must be created to be able to
capture this relationship and to communicate it within and among
generations. Knowing that the mortal portion of his life might prove too
brief to complete his work, he stated the problem in { *The New
Astronomy* } so that even his own death would not hinder his effort to
produce a result.

Cusa's and Kepler's method stands in sharp contrast to the inferior,
hostile reactions of Galilean empiricism and Cartesian mechanism. These
latter sought to undermine the progress in human knowledge gained by
Cusa and Kepler, by disconnecting the changes measured in small
intervals, from the universe as a whole. These reactionary efforts were
dealt a further blow with Pierre de Fermat's elaboration of the
principle of least-time. Fermat recognized that non-constant change was
not limited to planetary motion, but was a fundamental characteristic of
the physical universe. Kepler and Willibrod Snell had already discovered
that the path of refracted light was dependent, not on the uniform
relationship between the angle of incidence and the angle of refraction,
but on the non-linear relationship between the sines of theses angles.
Fermat threw the Cartesians into a snit fit by demonstrating that this
non-linear characteristic of refracted light is an effect of a universal
principle of least-time. He proved that the change in the direction of
the path of light at the boundary between two media, is determined so as
to minimize the time it took the light to travel the total path. This
implies that a global characteristic, i.e. total time, is determining
the position of the light as it travels along its way. The Cartesians
argued that this could not be so because that would imply that a
metaphysical intention, not a physical mechanism, determined the path of
light. But the scientific evidence was irrefutable, and Fermat was
defended vigorously by Leibniz, who insisted that a created universe, in
which human creativity is an active principle, could have it no other
way.

Responding to these provocations of Kepler and Fermat, Leibniz
contributed the expression Kepler demanded: *the idea of the
infinitesimal as an expression of an ever-changing universal principle*
. Leibniz realized that to express physical action as an effect of a
principle of change, the relationship between the universal expression
of a principle, and its everywhere non-constantly changing
manifestation, must be captured. This he succeeded in doing through his
elaboration of the mutually inverse relationship of the differential and
integral forms of the infinitesimal calculus, which, in more general
physical terms, he called the *science of dynamics* .

Though the above reported summary is a matter of indisputable scientific
and historical fact, the overwhelming majority of scientists today are
completely ignorant of it, owing to a concerted campaign against
Leibniz, which attempted to suppress Leibniz's work in favor of the
black magic hoaxster Isaac Newton. The purpose of this attack was not an
arcane scientific debate, but a deliberate effort on the part of the
Anglo-Dutch remnant of the Roman and Venetian oligarchy, to prevent the
source of Leibniz's discovery of the calculus, not only from forming the
basis for a continuation of the Renaissance science of Cusa and Kepler,
but from also becoming the basis for reorganizing human social relations
according to the principle of the sovereign nation-states, whose purpose
and existence is to defend and foster the sovereign creative powers of
the individual human mind. The connection between the prominence of
Leibniz's concept of happiness as a founding principle of the United
States of America, with Leibniz's notion of the infinitesimal calculus,
as defended by the Leibnizian collaborator of Benjamin Franklin, A.G.
Kaestner, illustrates this point.

The widespread acceptance today of the attacks on Leibniz is
demonstrated by the common, but fraudulent way in which the calculus is
introduced to secondary school students and undergraduates in
universities. In these classes, the students are usually first
introduced, by formal definition, to Augustin Cauchy's notion of a
"derivative". Then, after a generous amount of histrionics concerning
little deltas and epsilons, the student is let in on another formal
procedure identified as integrals, which is presented as the formal
inversion of the derivative. If the student has been successfully
brainwashed at this point, (either by failing to master the formalism
and thus falsely believing himself to be an "artistic" rather than a
scientific person, or, what is just as damaging, by foolishly believing
that mastering the formalism certifies him as, "good at math and
science"), he or she will be allowed to enter the higher reaches of the
academic temple. At this point the student is introduced into the heady
world of differential equations, which he is told from the very
beginning, are equations that are for the most part "unsolvable", but
for which a great body of formal rules have been written. The student is
then doomed to destroy whatever is left of his or her creativity in
mastering these rules.
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"}

This method of teaching is not only destructive, it is, in scientific
terminology, ass-backward. Calculus instruction should proceed, first
and foremost, in the historical context in which it developed, as
summarized above. Then the student should be provoked to rediscover it
as Leibniz discovered it, first with a study of *differential functions*
. Then Leibniz's notion of the differential and the integral are easily
understood. Such an approach is the only one that has ever produced any
scientific discoveries since Leibniz's day, and all other methods are
intrinsically impotent.

Differential functions, as Leibniz designed them, state a physical
problem in the mode of classical irony: " *What are the characteristics
of a universal principle which produce the perfectly infinitesimal
changes in the investigated physical action?* " The fact that such
equations may not have a formal mathematical "solution" is of no
significance, as ironical statements, not formal definitions, state
principles
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"} . As Gauss and Riemann later showed, such
solutions can be known by freeing science from the restrictions of
formal mathematics, and entering the ironical domain of what Leibniz
called: *analysis situs* .

The paradigmatic example of Leibniz's method can be illustrated by the
history of the catenary principle. The first major demonstration of the
physical principle expressed by a hanging chain was Brunelleschi's
successful construction of the Dome over the church of Santa Maria del
Fiore in Florence, nearly 200 years before Leibniz and Johann Bernoulli
elaborated the physics of the catenary. Nevertheless, Brunelleschi not
only grasped the principle, without a formal mathematical expression,
but he was able to communicate that principle sufficiently to the
workmen charged with carrying out its construction, that they could
implement the project as if the idea were their own. To this day
Brunelleschi's Dome stands as a monument to the powers of the human
mind, and the inadequacy of formal mathematics.

In their subsequent study of the physics of the matter, Leibniz and
Bernoulli confronted the fact that the catenary could not be expressed
by any of the formal mathematical expressions known at that time.
Galileo had fudged the matter by trying to fit the catenary into the
shape of a parabola. Rejecting such foolishness, Bernoulli expressed the
shape of the chain as a function of the changing physical effect of
gravity and tension that was acting on the chain. Though he could write
down this relationship formally, by what Leibniz called a differential
function, he could not give it a more precise expression. Yet Leibniz
did, expressing the catenary principle with respect to his more general
understanding of Napier's principle of logarithmic functions.
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"} In so doing, Leibniz established the physically
functional relationship among circular and logarithmic functions, laying
the basis for its deeper expression by Gauss and Riemann in the complex
domain.

From this point on, all progress in physical science can be
characterized as further elaborations of the essential point of
Leibniz's method: *it is change that is primary, and the fundamental
unit of change is the universe as a whole* .

As Leibniz states in his *Discourse on Metaphysics* :

I am quite willing to admit that we are subject to deception when we
wish to determine God's ends or counsels. But this is only when we try
to limit them to some particular design, believing that he had only one
thing in view, when instead he regards everything at the same time. For
instance, it is a great mistake to believe that God made the world only
of us, although it is quite true that he made it in its entirety for us
and that there is nothing in the universe which does not affect us and
does not also accommodate itself in accordance with his regard for us,
following the principles set forth above.

This is what B. Riemann was referring to in his famous statement, "It is
well known that scientific physics has existed only since the invention
of the differential calculus."

The Physics of Global Effects

Differential functions indicate deeper underlying characteristics of the
universe than are evident from sense certainty. For example, formal
geometry, backed up by sense certainty, tells us that the circle is a
bounded curve with everywhere constant curvature. Yet, as the work of
Cusa, Kepler, Fermat and Leibniz demonstrate there is no such action in
the physical world. Instead, as the case of the catenary and refracted
light attest, physical action depends on the non-uniform functions, such
as, in this case, the sine function. But the sine function exists as
part of a connected group of periodic functions, whose relationship to
each other is expressed by their mutually connected principles of
change, or, in Leibniz's terms, their differentials. For example, the
differential of the sine function is the cosine function, and the
differential of the cosine function is minus the sine function.
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"} In this way, the circle can be defined, as it
really exists, as that curvature formed by periodic functions whose
differentials are related in this way. Similarly, Leibniz discovered the
general principle underlying Napier's logarithmic/exponential functions,
as that unique self-similar function whose differential is equal to the
function itself.
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"} It is from this standpoint that Leibniz was able
to recognize the connection between the circular and logarithmic
functions which underlies the principle of the catenary.

The superiority of Leibniz's method, which he demonstrated by the
solution to the catenary problem, was just the beginning. Leibniz, the
Bernoullis, and Leibniz's other collaborators, began immediately
applying that method to other physical problems, which produced more
complex differential functions. In the case of the catenary, for
example, the position of the links of the chain, is a function of the
changing relationship between the effect of gravity and tension on the
chain. But if the chain is set into a vertical oscillatory motion, as
when someone walks across a rope bridge, a second order change is
introduced. In that case, there is the changing relationship between
gravity and tension, *and* a change in that change.
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"}

Such second order effects are pervasive in dynamic action. Planetary
orbits, pendula, wave motion, electro-magnetic effects, geomagnetism,
thermodynamics, vibrating strings and membranes, are just a few examples
whose physical characteristics result from such second order effects.
What distinguishes the differential function that expresses one process
from another is the relationship among the underlying first and second
order principles of change.
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"}

For example, in the case of a circular pendulum, the bob travels along a
circular arc. But its motion along that arc is accelerated due to the
effect of the gravitational potential. As Leibniz showed, there is a
connected relationship between the position of the bob, its speed, and
the rate at which its speed is changing, which is governed by the
dynamic, (metaphysical) principle that he called *vis viva* . These
functions are united under a single principle, or as Leibniz
characterized it: the full effect is equal to the full cause. Thus, the
position of the bob is not determined by the angle the string makes with
the vertical, but by the rate of change of that angle, which itself is
always changing by a well-defined second order change. Though a
differential function could be defined which expressed this second order
relationship, none of the functions known in Leibniz's time corresponded
to it. Later, Gauss, and others, realized that this type of differential
function implied a new species of transcendental function "defined" not
directly, but as the "solution" to a physically determined differential
function.
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"} Since this differential function corresponded to
the same type of action associated with planetary orbits, it became
known as an elliptical transcendental.

In this way, Leinbiz's successors, most notably, Legendre, Pfaff, Gauss
and his collaborators such as Dirichlet, Bessel, and others, discovered
an entire zoology of functions that described physical processes. One
significant example is the case of the so-called "Bessel" functions
named for Gauss's collaborator, Wilhelm Bessel who, along with Gauss,
was investigating the "comma" associated with planetary perturbations.
Kepler had already indicated that the characteristics of a planet's
elliptical orbit, such as eccentricity, were not fixed, but are changing
with the development of the solar system.
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"} This reflects an effect in the harmonic ordering
of the solar system analogous to the Pythagorean comma in music.
However, in the case of the major planets, these changes are so slow and
small that they were below the error of measurement at that time. But
after the discovery of the asteroids, these small effects became subject
to investigation. In this regard, Bessel investigated the functional
relationship of the mean and eccentric anomalies with respect to a
changing eccentricity. This gave rise to a differential function given
his name.
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"}

These types of functions
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"} were entirely new, and could not be expressed in
terms of previously accepted formal mathematics. This posed an
existential crisis for the anti-creative empiricists. If the
experimental evidence indicated that the physical universe was acting
according to principles that were not represented by formal mathematics,
how could the mathematicians calculate formulas that corresponded to the
real world? Faced with the prospect of choosing between formal
mathematics and the real world, they attempted to approximate these
functions using curve-fitting statistical methods.
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"} This approach, typified by Euler, Laplace and
Lagrange, ultimately failed, because no matter how numerically close the
statistical methods were in large intervals, an everywhere-changing
principle of change is never susceptible of being truly captured by
numerical approximation and these statistical methods broke down in the
small.

The statistical approach became totally discredited by Gauss's famous
determination of the orbit of Ceres. In that case, Gauss alone solved
the problem of determining Ceres' orbit, because he recognized that the
small interval of Piazzi's observations, must reflect the harmonic
ordering of the solar system as a single dynamic process. Where all the
others were trying to compute Ceres orbit from statistical methods,
Gauss used the method of Kepler and Leibniz. As the October 1801
re-sighting of Ceres attests, Gauss was right, and the others were
wrong.
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"}

However, Gauss was not satisfied with just knowing the animals in the
zoo of differential functions. Rather than accepting a zoology of
Aristotelean categories, each with their special quirks and habits,
Gauss investigated the nature of the *species* of which all the animals
were a part. He recognized that all the differential functions that
arose from the investigations of the physical universe, were special
cases of a more general differential function, whose solution is what he
called, *the hypergeometric function* .

As with much of Gauss's work, his published treatise on the
hypergeometric function covers only a small part of his ideas. Some of
the rest is contained in fragmentary entries in his notebooks, and much
remained only in his mind. Fortunately, Riemann had access to both, and
applying his own creative insights to the foundation laid down by Gauss,
he elaborated the nature of the species that today is associated with
the idea of *Riemannian physical hypergeometries* . As he stated in his
1857 treatise on the subject:

In the following work I have treated these transcendental functions by a
new method, which essentially remains applicable to any of those
functions that satisfy a linear differential equation with algebraic
coefficients. What previously had been found only by troublesome
calculations, this approach yields almost directly from the definition.
What has been done in the part of the work presented here, chiefly in
view of their numerous applications in physics and astronomy, is to give
a suitable overview of the possible representations of the functions.
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"}

Riemann's ideas are contained in this published treatise, as well as a
series of notes of his 1858/1859 winter semester lectures.
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"} In his author's introduction to the published
work, Riemann specifies his approach:

In the work announced here a method has been applied to these
transcendentals, whose principles have been discussed in my inaugural
dissertation (section 20) and which yields all previous results almost
without calculation.
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"}

In that doctoral dissertation, Riemann had shown that physical
principles, which themselves are not accessible via sense perception,
can be expressed by the global characteristics, specifically the
boundary conditions and singularities, of a complex function and, that
these characteristics determine completely the behavior of the function
in the infinitesimally small.

Riemann built his method primarily on the work of Gauss and Dirichlet on
*potential* functions which arose in the investigation of
electromagnetic, geomagnetic and thermodynamic effects. These functions
sought to express these physical effects by the essential
characteristics of the underlying principle. Those characteristics are
expressed as a set of two or more families of curves which are
everywhere mutually orthogonal. These curves are the pathways of minimum
and maximum changes in the potential and thus express a physical
principle of least-action. Gauss and Dirichlet showed that this
principle of least-action is primary, and that the boundary conditions
such as, for example, the surface of a magnet or electrical body,
determines the specific shape of the curves. In this way, the physical
principle of least action determines the physical-geometrical "shape" of
physical space time--a principle that Riemann famously termed,
"Dirichlet's Principle". (See Figure 1). Riemann recognized that this
physical principle of least action can be expressed uniquely by complex
functions.

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/01-riemann69.gif)

However, Riemann understood that a boundary, in the most general sense,
is where the characteristics of change, *fundamentally change* .
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"} This does not necessarily mean a definite place,
such as at the surface of a magnetic or electric body, but a *definite,
fundamental change* in the principles acting, such as in the case of the
boundary between abiotic, biotic and cognitive processes.
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"}

In the differential functions, this higher form of change is indicated
when the differential function appears to become infinite. But as Cusa
recognized, the appearance of the infinite in the finite is not an
indication of something "out of this world", but the footprint of a new
principle that is acting on the boundary of the old, affecting it
everywhere, in the infinitesimally small.

This relationship is brought out when the associated differential
functions are expressed using Riemann's geometrical method of expressing
complex functions. In that case, the number of singularities determines
the global characteristics, and vice versa. For example, Figure 2
illustrates a transformation of a potential function with two
singularities (principles) to one with seven. Notice that as more
singularities are added, the internal relationships *fundamentally*
change, while the orthogonal characteristic of the principle of
least-action is maintained.
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"} Significantly, each new singularity (principle)
is added *discontinuously* .
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"}

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/02-riemann69.gif){width="720"
height="480"}

The emergence of the new singularities, like a creative discovery of a
new physical or artistic principle, entirely changes the global
characteristics of the manifold. This is exemplified by Kepler's
determination that there was no equant, which meant that the global
characteristics of the universe were entirely different than those
assumed by Ptolemy, Copernicus and Brahe.
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"} Though gravity existed prior to Kepler's
discovery, his discovery of it *fundamentally changed* , gravity's role
in the universe, as Kepler brought it into the province of the human
mind.

Riemann further demonstrated that the emergence of singularities was a
physical necessity, not a mathematical effect. Most notable in this
regard is his famous demonstration of the existence of shockwaves,
decades before their experimental demonstration. In his study
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"} , Riemann shows that a process expressed by an
otherwise continuous differential function, will necessarily reach a
boundary condition where a singularity (shock wave) will occur. The
formation of this shock wave redefines the characteristics of the entire
process.

From this standpoint, Riemann defined a higher function, which he called
the " *P* -function" of which the hypergeometric function is a special
case. Much to the chagrin of the formalists, Riemann never wrote down a
formula for this function, but described it only by the number of
singularities, and the behavior of the function at those points. In this
way, Riemann showed that if these minimum number of conditions were
specified, the entire characteristics of the potential function, in
every infinitesimally small interval, are determined, *without the need
for calculation* .

From this Riemannian standpoint, Heraclites' aphorism takes on an
entirely new light. *Nothing is constant but change, but change itself
must change* .

The Harmonics of Global Effects

Riemann's *P* -function, and his associated study of abelian functions,
has implications far beyond an expression for a species of physical
differential functions. It provides a foundation for developing a
concept for a higher type of functional relationship, that expresses the
anti-entropic nature of a universe, self-developing into higher states
of organization and existence. Such a function is characterized by an
ever-increasing density of *harmonically ordered* singularities. Like
Riemann's *P* -function, this concept cannot be expressed by any
mathematical formula. Only the methods learned from classical irony and
metaphor will suffice.

The earliest known developed form of this investigation is associated
with the Pythagoreans, who found, in the relationship between musical
and geometrical harmonies, a reflection of the characteristics of
universal principles. Most notable in this regard is Archytas's
remarkable construction for the doubling of the cube, and his related
work on musical harmonics. As Plato documents in his dialogues, these
discovered harmonic relationships reflect the true characteristics of a
developing universe, and the deliberate power of the human mind to
discover and master them. At the behest of his oligarchical masters,
Aristotle denigrated this harmonic connection, between human creativity
and the universe as a whole, to a mere accident, laying the basis for
modern empiricism and fascism. The popular acceptance of Aristotle's
view over Plato's among the Greek-speaking states, led, as Aeschylus,
Archytas and Plato warned, to a degeneration from the higher levels of
scientific, artistic, technological and culture development previously
achieved, and to the ultimate dominance of Europe by the oligarchical
system, but for a few notable exceptions, for nearly 1500 years.

With the dominance of Aristotle finally shattered by Cusa, his follower,
Kepler, picked up the study of harmonics where the Greeks stopped. In
the first three books of his *Harmony of the World* , Kepler summarizes,
in a more advanced form, the most significant discoveries of harmonics
that had been achieved by Greek culture. There he shows the connection
among the harmonic divisions of the circle, sphere and musical scale.
Further, in the concluding fourth and fifth books, Kepler shows that the
non-uniform periodic motion of the planets, when taken from the
standpoint of the solar system as a whole, reflects these same harmonic
relationships.
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"}

However, when these Keplerian harmonics are re-examined from the
standpoint of Gauss and Riemann, an even higher form of harmonics
emerges.

As Kepler shows in recapitulating the Greek understanding of the matter,
the regular divisions of the circle are distinguished from one another
by the degrees of "knowability" through which their magnitudes are
constructed. Each new division requires a new species of magnitude.
Kepler understood from Cusa that all these degrees of knowability are
subsumed by a higher, transcendental, species of magnitude, later
understood, as discussed above, to be expressed by the periodic and
non-uniform circular functions.

But Gauss recognized that the regular divisions of the circle are
produced by the unique harmonic characteristics intrinsic to these
periodic non-uniform functions.
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"} Each regular division, Gauss showed, is, like a
planetary orbit, a unique form of harmonic motion. Thus, from the
standpoint of sense certainty, the regular plane figures may appear as
equal divisions of the circle, but their true origin lies in the
harmonics of non-uniform motion. Further, Gauss discovered, these
harmonic "orbits" are themselves harmonically ordered, as reflected in
the different degrees of knowability of their associated magnitudes.
Once he had this higher harmonic relationship in view, Gauss was able to
recognize that the so-called "constructable" magnitudes were limited to
certain harmonic values. This allowed him to see at once the extension
of the constructable magnitudes to the 17-gon and other similar higher
divisions.

As Kepler notes, the harmonic divisions of the circle only partially
reflect the harmonics of the physical world, because they are harmonic
divisions of a curve, and the world is a globe. Thus, in the tradition
of the Pythagoreans, he turned first to the higher harmonic
relationships of the sphere. The constantly curved sphere, Kepler
showed, expressed these harmonics (which he called by the Latin word
congruence) in the regular and semi-regular solids. Gauss showed, with
his work on curved surfaces and Napier's pentagramma mirificum, that
these harmonics reflect the periodicity of spherical curvature. As
Gauss's work indicates, and these harmonics reflect, the everywhere
constantly curved spherical surface, is only the visible form of an
underlying non-uniform periodic hypergeometric function.

But, as Kepler's treatment of musical harmonics shows, the harmonics of
curves and surfaces are still not sufficient. First, as is evident from
the bel-canto polyphony, the musical harmonics cannot be derived from
the harmonics of curves and surfaces and, second, the physical harmonics
of the solar system reflect these two, related, but distinct harmonic
relations as arising from a single principle.

Therefore, a higher species must be sought from which a form of
*hypergeometric harmonics* can unfold. Riemann's *P* -function provides
an insight into the sought-for principle. As Riemann showed, the global
characteristics of his *P* -function generate such a higher form of
harmonics, as the consequence of hypergeometric periodicity.

Though the mind can see clearly these hypergeometric periodicities, they
can not be directly visualized as in the case of a curve or sphere.
Nevertheless, Riemann provided a geometrical metaphor
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"} to express the principle relationships. He
applied the same method to his *P* -function.

As discussed above, Riemann showed that the essential characteristics of
all physical functions are determined by the number of singularities,
and the behavior of the function at these points. The simplest
hypergeometric case specifies three such singularities. Thus, when the
solution of the hypergeometric function is expressed by Riemann's
geometrical method of complex functions, it maps a hemisphere onto a
triangle, with the singularities corresponding to the vertices. The
behavior of the function at these points is expressed by the angles at
each vertex. (See Figure 3.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/03a-riemann69.gif){width="720"
height="480"}

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/03b-riemann69.gif){width="319"
height="480"}

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/03c-riemann69.gif){width="197"
height="480"}

Riemann then constructed a periodic function from the hypergeometric
function, by mapping one hemisphere to a triangle, the remaining
hemisphere to a neighboring triangle, a second layer of the first
hemisphere to another triangle, and so forth. The singularities are
always mapped to the vertices, and the behavior of the function at those
points is expressed by the angles that the boundary of the triangle
makes at those points. Riemann noted that if the sum of the angles of
such a triangle is greater than 180 degrees, then the triangle is a
spherical one. If it is equal to 180 degrees, the triangle is planar.
And if the sum is less than 180 degrees, the triangle is negatively
curved.

In general, the triangles generated from this periodic hypergeometric
function will not form, what Kepler called a congruence, or harmonic
relationship, except in those cases where the angles formed by the sides
of these triangles correspond to certain harmonic values. In the case of
the spherical angles, that corresponds to the angles of the five regular
solids. (See Figure 4.).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/04a-riemann69.gif){width="720"
height="480"}

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/04b-riemann69.gif){width="290"
height="480"}

In the case of plane angles, that corresponds to the angles of the
elliptic function. (See Figure 5.).

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/05a-riemann69.gif){width="720"
height="480"}

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/05b-riemann69.gif){width="423"
height="480"}

In the case of negatively curved surfaces, that corresponds to the
angles of the hyper-elliptical and abelian functions. (See Figure 6.)

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/06a-riemann69.gif){width="720"
height="480"}

![](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/06b-riemann69.gif){width="467"
height="480"}

Thus, the five regular solids are unique, harmonic values of a
hypergeometric function, among a larger set of hypergeometric harmonics.

In this way, Riemann showed that functions with an increasing number of
singularities can be constructed as the inverse of such a hypergeometric
periodic function. Further, a notion can be formed from this of a higher
function that encompasses this succession of periodic functions. Such a
notion provides a first glimpse of the global characteristics from which
*hypergeometric harmonies,* unfold.

Yet, as Kepler's experimental evidence indicates, the actual harmonics
of the physical universe are much more complex. Kepler's harmonic
relationships among the planetary orbits are not perfect, but indicate a
higher principle, a more complex global principle of change governing
planetary motion, than is indicated when the harmonic relations are
derived from a lower level. This higher principle was, in part,
discovered by Gauss's determination of the orbit of Ceres and his
discovery that planetary motion was associated with the higher harmonic
principle of the arithmetic-geometric mean. That was extended still
further, with Gauss's and Riemann's demonstration that this was a
special case of the hypergeometric function.

That higher harmonic relationship is indicated in what should not seem
like another domain: J.S. Bach's compositions of bel-canto well-tempered
polyphony. Bach's demonstration of the higher powers of human cognition
through his compositions, further points to the nature of the higher
harmonics at work in the organization of the universe as a whole.
Beethoven's extension of Bach's method, most notably in his late string
quartets, leads us even further into an understanding of these higher
harmonics.

Such an approach must now be taken, as Riemann indicated in his
habilitation dissertation, into the investigation of the microphysical
and astrophysical domains. Already, the experimental evidence amassed
since Riemann's time has indicated the existence of very complex
harmonic orderings in these domains.
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"} Yet the resurgence of the Aristotelean belief in
a mythical state of no-change, as exemplified by the Copenhagen school's
interpretation of quantum mechanics insistence on an ultimately random,
i.e., non-changing, universe, has led the majority of scientists on a
fools errand of either developing statistical models, or searching for a
new form of mathematical formalism that tries to divine the appearance
of change as an effect of no-change.

All such efforts have and will fail. What is needed is a fresh look.
One, based on Cusa, Kepler, Leibniz, Gauss, Riemann and LaRouche that
strives from these complex harmonies, to hear the composition as a
whole.

Happily, the impetus for such a change is already underway.
![Footnote](http://lymcanada.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/2/2010/02/footnoteicon.gif){width="16"
height="14" border="0"}
:::

::: {.addtoany_share_save_container .addtoany_content_bottom}
::: {.a2a_kit .a2a_kit_size_32 .addtoany_list a2a-url="http://lymcanada.org/69/" a2a-title="Riemann for Anti-Dummies: Part 69 :  Change is All Ye Know On Earth — And in Heaven"}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/facebook?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F69%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2069%20%3A%20%20Change%20is%20All%20Ye%20Know%20On%20Earth%20%E2%80%94%20And%20in%20Heaven "Facebook"){.a2a_button_facebook}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/twitter?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F69%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2069%20%3A%20%20Change%20is%20All%20Ye%20Know%20On%20Earth%20%E2%80%94%20And%20in%20Heaven "Twitter"){.a2a_button_twitter}
[](http://www.addtoany.com/add_to/google_plus?linkurl=http%3A%2F%2Flymcanada.org%2F69%2F&linkname=Riemann%20for%20Anti-Dummies%3A%20Part%2069%20%3A%20%20Change%20is%20All%20Ye%20Know%20On%20Earth%20%E2%80%94%20And%20in%20Heaven "Google+"){.a2a_button_google_plus}
[](https://www.addtoany.com/share){.a2a_dd .addtoany_share_save}
:::
:::
:::

[ [ Posted on ]{.screen-reader-text} [February 20, 2010 February 24,
2019](http://lymcanada.org/69/) ]{.posted-on} [ [ [ Author
]{.screen-reader-text} [Bruce
Director](http://lymcanada.org/author/bdirector/){.url .fn .n} ]{.author
.vcard} ]{.byline} [ [ Categories ]{.screen-reader-text}
[EN](http://lymcanada.org/category/en/) , [Riemmann for
Anti-Dummies](http://lymcanada.org/category/science-1/c132-riemmann-for-anti-dummies/)
]{.cat-links}
